We only got you down for 10 minutes,
and then we've got, uh, trans power coming in,
uh, in 10 minutes time.
Um, but, uh, any opening comments you wanna make,
particularly about how the, uh,
the wind down processes are going, um, will be good.
Mm-hmm. You want give your introduction, Victor?
Yeah, sorry. Yeah. And just put my hearing aids. Oh, no,
That's okay. Nice to see you too.
Good to see you de
Thank you, Mr.
Chairman. First of all, I'd just like to introduce
ECNZ members here.
I'm the chairman, and next talk to me is Jane Mes,
who's a director, and there's just two directors.
I'd like to thank you all for inviting us
to have a discussion with you,
and I'd like to briefly comment on EC
and Z's current stages.
The 1999 EC
and Z's remaining generation assets were sold
to three SOEs.
Since then, directors have been working to ensure
that all land, which the SOEs were entitled to
have been transferred from the Crown to ECNZ
and then to the generators in accordance
with the SOEA In recent years.
Resolution of those land rights has generally been complex
involving easements, marginal strips, strata titles,
uh, first ref, first refusals, and Murray.
Land resolution
of issues has involved a number of parties, namely
Treasury Dock and NCTA.
Some land has been the subject of litigation,
which has deferred as transfer,
which land at the Waka Murray Power Station remains
owned by the Crown, by the dam
and power stations located on that land
zoned by Mercury.
We understand from treasury that litigation
regarding ownership
and this part of the Waco River is continuing
and the land will remain owned by The Crown.
For the meantime
has no staff.
Two directors is an SOE
and must still prepare an annual business plan statement
of corporate intent, half yearly an annual accounts,
and comply with all relevant requirements
of the company's act.
The directors wrote to shareholding ministers in
February, 2021, February, 2023,
and January, 2024, requesting approval
to commence the process to deregister
to as the company.
We are working with treasury
to resolve some residual matters.
The directors understand that if, if would be wound up
any residual land or interest in land, such as leases
or easements, could transfer directly from the crown
to the generators under the SOEA and the public.
Thank you.
Thank you. Alright, any questions?
Uh, yeah. Hey, thank you for coming in today.
I'm just wondering, so what, what are the remaining,
I, I've got harder here. You can stick with
That. Yes. No worries. Yes.
Thank you for coming in today.
Just, um, so you've written to the ministers, um,
what are the remaining issues that, um, they've indicated
that is preventing the organization from going
through the wind up here? Process?
Um, we've written to ministers
and treasury has advised that there are still, um,
some issues that need to be worked through.
They're mainly relating to land.
Um, but really we believe that, uh, any land that still sits
with the crown could be transferred to the, uh,
and recipient without us being, um, in place.
So we don't see
that there's any impediment to us being wound up.
Can I ask good stuff on that? Yes. Thank you.
In terms of, uh, the land, is that splattered,
like is it concentrated in a particular area
or is it small parcels?
Well, as, um, Victor said there's a piece
of land at Fama Dam, which, uh, is one piece of land.
There's a piece of land called the Oau Canal.
Uh, and I think those are the only two pieces of land
that need to be, uh, well, the Fama Dam is unlikely
to be transferred because it's subject to litigation,
which will take a number of years, I think, to wind
through the process and the oh, how land we are.
Um, just waiting for shareholding
ministers to sign some documents. I understand,
Scott. So,
um, in relation to that,
so if I understand it correctly, treasury disagree with you
or, or don't, don't,
We aren't privy to treasury's advice to
Ministers, but all you're waiting for is the minister
to, to agree.
And you, but Treasury have put some hesitation in,
in, in that, is that, um,
Not the time? Well, Victor,
We don't really know what the shareholders are because,
but we do have communications with treasury
and we are assisting them on some issues.
So we are trying to help each other.
Okay. Tracy,
So in the meantime, do you have sufficient funds to
complete that wind up or to continue to exist,
or, um, how long will that funding, um,
last you in this, in this period of waiting,
In our last letter to the shareholders, we mentioned that
if there's any prolonged delay,
then EZ would be short of funds.
And our current planning is
that either June next year we should
have a discussion with the shareholders.
If we're still in existence, then
With no money, if you're still in existence,
then you have kind of run out current funding. Our,
Our current projection is if a decision's made
by June next year, we will have enough money to
complete the winding up process,
but if a decision isn't made by June, we'll have
to have another discussion with ministers.
Thank you. So can you just
elaborate a little bit more on that one?
Um, FAK Maru,
then you see there's not life defense transfer.
What's the, what's the issue there?
Um, well it might, the issue has to do with
the Riverbed land, which is covered
by a Supreme Court decision in 2014. Oh, is this
'cause it's white To do with a riverbed land.
Right. We're not involved directly involved. Right,
Okay. Right.
Tracy,
The treasury advice, are we, are we able to have
that, can we see that
Treasury advice, two ministers?
Well, the treasury advice that you are privy to,
I think it was not privy to,
We're not privy to, we're not privy
to treasurer's, advice to ministers.
Can I, yeah, go on. Just, just on that,
you might not be privy to the specific advice,
but are you comfortable
that shareholding ministers are very clear as to what
the potential consequences would be if,
if decisions continue to be delayed?
I know that there are circumstances
around why they might be delayed,
But we've certainly
provided that information to the treasury.
Whether that's got to shareholding ministers
or not, I couldn't say, but I would imagine.
So
Maybe we can ask the chair to request it for the
Committee. Well, perhaps what
we can do is certainly note
that there is an issue there, which we'd be interested in,
um, finding out a little bit more about Yeah.
And whether any decisions are actually gonna be made.
And if so, when it sounds
like you've had several goes at it.
Yeah. Okay. Any other questions?
Doesn't look like it, so thank you both.
Really appreciate it. And, um, keep up the good work as long
as it's, um, able to be kept up
or as long as it's necessary to keep it up.
Right.
Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. We've done more.
Okay. We've got friends power in the room.
Council. Thank you, Victor. Nice to see you
Straight to one of something as well.
On what, this is a perfect section.
Yes, yes. If you want,
We usually ask Does, um,
Okay. I'll ask,
I'll ask. Okay.
My ea ask question, can, can my come to just
probably take a quiz, take a photos and,
and see what we are doing as public section station?
Good. Okay. I'm
Sure I was advised Lee was
Photo very good on social media.
Right. Good. Probably only be with Carlos, but
I just think it's better to us. I know
It's right. Okay. Right.
Okay. Carlos,
Michelle, welcome and welcome to you and your team.
It's good to have you here. Um,
and uh, what we've done is we've given you a few minutes to,
um, up to I think six minutes
to introduce any particular issues.
I'm sure we'll have plenty of questions.
Um, so, uh, then we'll
spend the rest of the time on questions.
Thank you. And your hands.
Uh, thank you very much, um, for seeing us today.
Uh, my name is Michelle Ling, the chair of Trans Power,
and this to my left is James Ty, our chief executive.
Got it. We also have members
of our executive team here today.
James, would you like to
Introduce? Uh,
so we have, uh, from the executive, uh, David Knight,
who's EGM of strategy, governance and Regulation.
Uh, Catherine Shaw immediately behind me,
who's our Chief Fin Financial Officer,
and Mark Wild to her left your right as you look at them.
Uh, who is head of grid, grid delivery EGM of grid delivery.
And to his left is, is Nathan who runs our
Comms process.
So both James and I are relatively new to our roles
with James joining Trans Power in February this year,
and I was appointed chair in June.
I thought it'd be useful to start by briefly recapping, uh,
what Trans power does and
where we fit into the energy system.
We are a state owned enterprise that owns
and operates New Zealand's high voltage
electricity transmission Network, the National Bridge.
We are also contracted by the electricity authority
to operate the wholesale electricity market
through which generators sell energy to retailers.
In this role as a system operator, we want to ensure
that the amount of electricity generated matches
how much Kiwis need or want to use.
To do this, we manage system security
and real time all day, every day of the year.
Trans power does not generate or retail electricity,
nor do we set the prices that consumers pay.
Our revenue is set in a five year period
by the Commerce Commission, following a robust process
to ensure our investments give consumers good value
for money while delivering the reliability, that reliability
that Kiwis expect.
We recover our revenue from lines, companies, generators,
and directly connected industrial users
using a method called the TPM set
by the electricity authority.
Ultimately, our revenue charges through to consumers
with transmission charges making up about 8%
of the average residential bill.
We are also subject to New Zealand Stock Exchange listing
rules with $650 million enlisted debt, which means
that we have company reporting
and debt listing obligations as well.
Trans power's core purpose is
to empower the energy future of New Zealand.
Our people are dedicated to keeping the lights on
for New Zealanders and ensuring that there is a safe
and reliable electricity system that enables our economy.
It is something we are deeply passionate about.
Looking back on the last year in terms
of overall performance, we met all
but one of our targets across safety, sustainability,
availability of the system, asset health
and financial metrics.
We missed one technical measure, a decision we made so
that we could complete critical work without impacting
supply to consumers.
In addition to achieving our performance measures,
there are a number of notable highlights I would like
to mention, including improvements
to our customer connection pipeline,
some excellent innovation by our HVDC team,
the positive impact of our security of supply reporting
and our world leading approach
to managing space weather risk.
When someone wants to com, uh, connect to the grid,
they must make an application to trans power.
We have seen a significant increase in these requests from
about three to five requests a year, a few years ago,
to now receiving more than 100 in a year.
To address this increase in volume,
we form dedicated specialized teams
who take a more proactive approach.
This has enabled us to focus on those
who are ready to proceed.
We are now going 80% faster than we were 12 months ago.
Last year, we commissioned 300 megawatts of new generation
and capacity upgrades about the same amount of power needed
for Wellington City at peak times.
The HVDC link is a critical part
of New Zealand's electricity infrastructure running from
Benmore on the south island under the Cook Strait
and onto Haywoods just north of Wellington.
We completed a midlife refurbishment to extend the life
of specific critical components of this HVDC link.
It was a very rare piece of work globally
and something that there was no manual for.
This challenging and complex work delivered
significant value to New Zealand.
It costs $63 million,
but it has enabled us to defer over a billion dollars
for the next 20 years.
As a system operator, our analysis
and advice to industry on security
of supply risks is critical to keeping the lights on.
This year, our reporting gave an early
and clear picture to industry during the drier start
to a year in history, which prompted the industry
to secure more fuel, gas,
and coal for electricity much earlier in the year.
As a result, we did not see the significant spice, um,
spike in prices and wholesale prices that we saw in 2024.
Space weather has the potential to significantly impact
and damage the grid leading to lengthy power outages.
Transfer has been working for more than a decade
to grow our expertise,
including investing in university led research.
We have developed a national response plan in conjunction
with NEMA and are now supporting the UK with their efforts.
As I look to 2026
and beyond, the work
that we did last year has set us up well for that
and the years to come work on the customer connection
pipeline continues as an area of focus.
We have 970 megawatts of new generation booked
for commissioning about three times that of last year.
We will also complete projects
to connect new demand or load.
Both aspects are critical for ensuring security of supply
and this country's economic growth.
In my opening remarks, I referred to the TPM,
the regulated method by which we charge our revenue
to lines, companies, generators,
and directly connected industrial users.
The TPM is highly technical and complex.
Recently, we commenced an operational review with the aim
to address the TPMS complexity and make it simpler
and more predictable.
Our aim is to increase certainty
and clarity, both for existing investors
and those who are looking to invest in new projects.
We will also explore ways
to address customer concerns on the cost of recovery
for network investment in low population areas
situated some distance from the core transmission backbone.
In July, we entered a new five year regulatory control
period known as RCP four.
RCP four includes intensified work on the national grid
to replace or upgrade aging assets.
Much of our grid was built during the 1950s and seventies
and now requires an increasing level of replacement
and refurbishment work.
That work as well as investment in new infrastructure is
essential to ensuring, ensuring KIWIS continue
to have a safe and reliable national grid.
It is also an an important foundation
for future enhancements to support electrification
and economic growth.
Long-term thinking to ensure that the grid remains fit
for purpose for years to come is vital.
Our PU project is about ensuring the transmission network
supports our chira to thrive
and grow as it electrifies by creating a grid blue footprint
for investment to 2050 and beyond.
We know that affordability is a major issue
and we are very aware that when we invest in the network,
it is ultimately Kiwis who pay for it.
We know it is tough out there
and we are focused on ensuring
that we make smart investments look at multiple options
and work hard to increase productivity,
to get the best value for money and for New Zealanders
because at the end of the day, they are
who we are here to serve.
Thank you very much for listening
to my opening remarks and Sure.
I'll now hand back to you chair. Thank
You. And, um, those notes,
it'd be useful
for tho I mean we'll have them all, all on hand up,
but, um, those notes be useful.
Fine. Right. Think I had the first
questions from, from Scott.
Thank you. Thank you for the great overview.
Um, you mentioned that the strategic framework notes
that the purpose is to empower t's energy future.
What's our energy future?
May I we, you you may have,
but I was gonna say one thing
and then I'll hand to you. How's that? There you
Go.
We have the luxury in many ways compared
to many other countries of actually being the master
of our own destiny.
And so the decisions
that we collectively make over the next year
or two will actually have a lasting impact on not only this
generation, but for the many generations that follow.
Okay, James.
Thank you Michelle. Um,
there is a massive opportunity in front of New Zealand
to leverage the resource space that we have.
We're privileged, um, uh, I I describe this when I'm trying
to wind up, um, Australian friends,
that we are the new lucky country.
Um, the world is circling around, uh, renewable energy
and New Zealand's got bucket loads of it.
Uh, and our aspiration at trans powers
to support New Zealand to utilize more of that.
Forecasts differ, but sort of center
around a central scenario
that says electricity is currently 25% roughly
of the nation's energy consumption.
If we're gonna hit our net 0 20 50 target, that's gonna jump
to about 60, 65% of our energy consumption.
If we want to grow the economy,
there's enough resource to do more.
Uh, there's a huge opportunity for, uh, New Zealand to grow
to zero, grow its economy,
leveraging these resources while still tracking
to meet our trade commitments and climate commitments.
Net 0 20 50, there are trade offs in that chair.
Um, and Scott, you'll be aware of these.
The, the trade offs are, um, more infrastructure.
Um, we're going to be looking at more wind turbines on hills
and solar panels and fields
and geothermal power stations, uh,
in the central north island and, and up north at nafa.
Um, and we will need to look at more poles
and wires to deliver that to Kiwis.
We'll also be looking, I think, at a significant number
of solar panels on rooftops
and distributed batteries around the country.
Distributed energy has a massive part to play in this,
both from meeting energy needs
and a resilience perspective, uh, can deliver both.
Um, but it's not enough on its own.
We still need large scale centralized wind, solar,
geothermal, existing hydro, maybe some new hydro,
uh, to drive this future.
And for now and for the foreseeable future,
as we have been on the record about many times,
we're gonna need a backup of thermal fuel
for as long as we need it.
And no one knows how long that's going to be.
We're going to need some coal,
and we're going to need some gas for as long as, uh,
as is necessary to keep,
keep our system secure and affordable.
Um, and we, and we, we shouldn't be, in my view,
we shouldn't be concerned about that.
We are currently 90% renewable in the electricity system
would be 95% renewable in a couple of years.
Um, that is world leading.
Uh, the focus for now for us is on security,
ensuring the system is secure, that also helps
with affordability, uh,
which means people can in fact
transition their use to electricity.
Scott, you carry on with, uh, another one
or two, and then I'll go to Simon.
Thank you. And I like everything you're saying at the
moment, but, um, in the 150 page report,
it only mentions affordability around 10 times.
Reliability is twice as many mentions
and security, four times as many.
So clearly there have been some issues with reliability
and security of supply.
But is affordable energy a part
of our energy future?
And how are we gonna get there?
Yeah, look, most, uh, external reports will tell you that
as, um, as more renewables come into the market,
we will see prices return to more balanced,
long run marginal costs.
So a more balanced mix of fuels
that will get forward prices down.
Um, I noticed the, the recent round of, uh,
of market reports from Gen Taylors plus
some independent analysis.
Uh, see that price coming down, um,
by about 20 28, 20 30 it starts to come down.
Well, there's a lot of investment happening right now.
Billions of dollars are being invested in new power stations
right now, and we are working very, very hard
to ensure they connect rapidly.
That is our biggest contribution
to affordability at Trans Power, is helping to connect, uh,
new forms, uh, of energy to the grid as soon as we can, uh,
to support, uh, the shift in, in supply demand dynamic
that will drive cost down, uh, for customers.
Uh, the other thing we're doing on affordability at Trans
Power, and we recognize times are tough for Kiwis,
it is a tough environment, um, uh,
is focusing on our own productivity.
Um, so it it's a, it's a, a mixed message here.
So please bear with the, you will not see me trying
to drive our operating costs down.
What you'll see me trying to do is get a lot more
for every dollar that the regulator gives us.
So our workload is gonna increase by 70 to 80% it has,
and our job is to deliver all that with the same amount
of people, the same resources we have available to us.
So we've got to get a lot more efficient
and we're tracking, uh, it's not an easy task,
but, uh, we're tracking well towards it at the moment.
We have a number of programs aimed at delivering that.
Mm-hmm. And all of that supports, um, the rapid scaling up,
uh, of, of the electricity grid, uh, that can support that,
that lower cost pathway for Kiwis.
Yeah. Uh, maybe I could just add one, one thing too
to that as well.
I think as, as you will be aware, we, uh,
the Commerce Commission sets our revenue effectively
for a five year period.
And that's on a cost up.
It's from a detailed costing approach,
it's a significant piece of work.
Probably would take us 18 minutes.
18 minutes, I wish they can move 18,
18 months, 18 months maybe.
We use AI to get it.
But anyway, it takes 18 months of work
probably from transfer.
Uh, and then also we use it independent devices of that
and then commerce commission, et cetera, all going
to go all thinking about is it, um, you're not
gilding the little, you're not over investing
it's appropriate right.
Cost, but for order to do that,
you're actually making a forward looking view of how much
or what work you're going to do
and how much it's going to cost effectively seven years out
from that final spend.
Mm. So you're forming a view on
what costs will do in terms of supply chain.
We, we tend to get locked into a, an estimate of CPI
and we seven years ago, that we might have a view on what
that was compared to now.
Uh, and then the communist commission and,
and rightly will give us a productivity challenge.
I think Catherine, is it about 1%? Roughly?
Yeah, half a percent.
So already baked in is it's, has to drive us
down a path of ensuring that we are getting value for money.
And especially at the beginning
of your regulatory control period, you're trying
to think about it, what it could be.
So for us, you know, what is it in
for four and a half years time?
And so we've gotta make sure that we set ourselves up
for success in that respect. Okay.
I'm gonna go one. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
1, 2, 3, 4.
Um, so just coming back to your, come back Yeah.
It's okay. Statement that the stockpile
of thermal coal was really important for Yes.
Security of supply. Do you think there's a case
for actually slowing down the transition from coal
to electricity for some major energy users?
And I, I I, I'll ask you to consider a fonterras plan
to transition away from thermal coal
and milk drying to electricity by 2037.
I've seen estimates that, um, that would add 250
to 300 megawatts of average electrical load every year, um,
and peaking at maybe 550 megawatts at peak of the,
uh, season.
So do, do you think it's realistic, uh, that you add
that much additional capacity, uh,
or load onto the grid in that timeframe?
Or actually would it be, uh, perhaps a little bit more,
I don't know, hedging to say, you know, you could slow
that down, still get pretty close to your carbon
reduction targets, but actually provide the grid a little
bit more resilience if you don't just try
to pile all in on electrification.
Um, I'll make some, um, observations on that.
We work very closely with the Fonterra team, um,
on the forward plans and, and their plans have changed.
Um, the focus two
to three years ago was very much on the transition away
from, um, coal, uh, production down in the south island.
Mm. Um, where there is no reticulated gas now with the,
the precipitous decline in gas availability in the country
that we've seen a laser-like focus from Fonterra on their
north island plant that is currently burning gas.
That's certainly been prioritized.
Um, it's a question for Fonterra as
to whether it's still feasible for them with all
of their capital now focused in the north island,
shifting off gas to either biomass or electricity.
Um, whether they can still hit that 2037 date, um, the,
the, the electricity resource is there.
New Zealand has the electricity resource as long
as we're willing to make the trade offs
to develop it and bring it to market.
Um, so that, I think that's, and we,
and we continue to work very well with, with Fonterra
and the North five budget commissioning one, uh, next year
as it transition electricity.
Just briefly, um, we heard the,
we heard trade offs mentioned.
I'm really interested, just give us a couple of examples
and I'm sure we can come back to that.
Um, I think, um, I mentioned in, in my opening comments,
um, you know, getting used to our, uh, some
of our bucolic uh, scenes around the country, um,
having more infrastructure on them, um,
uh, they are trade offs.
They're very real for the people who live in those,
those regions easy for us in the big cities
around the country to say, oh, you know, tough luck.
You should all look at wind turbines and, and,
and deal with the effects on flora fauna
and, uh, uh, you know, and, and, uh, and,
and iwi relationship to the land.
Um, uh,
but it's diff different for those people in those areas.
It's personal. And so, uh, there is, you know, work
to do for all of us.
Um, and we take this very seriously at transfer.
We talk a lot about it at board level.
How are we going to develop a social license to build all
of the things that need to be built if we are
to grasp this potential future for New Zealand?
Not just keeping the lights on,
but enabling economic growth by utilizing these resources.
Those are the sorts of trade offs I'm, I'm talking about.
And they're, that we all know they're tricky.
Um, and you can see it in processes now. Yeah. Carlos,
Yes, it's fascinated to hear all the future plan
and all the investment in project happening right now,
but my, my question is how, how does transition period
or investment period affecting the power cost right now?
Um, do you want me to take that?
Uh, so, uh, remind you of Michelle's, um, comments around
how our own costs, uh, developed
through the Commerce Commission and, and,
and regulated, um, what we've seen.
Um, uh, so just, just as a reference point,
our costs are traditionally somewhere between seven
and 9% of your average residential bill,
depending on the regulated weighted average cost of capital
that's applying for that five year block up or down.
That's roughly what the, the transmission portion of, uh,
of your bill is.
We asked, we have seen, um, wholesale costs rising, um,
with, uh, the fall in gas availability,
gas supplies, um, uh, peaking, uh, plant to our market.
So gas flows into our, into our generation system
and supports peaking plant and also some base load.
One base load unit, uh, left, uh,
in the country running on gas that's up at Huntley.
Um, and as the gas supply has tightened around the country,
the prices of that fuel have gone up.
The risk to availability of it have gone up,
and that has transferred into wholesale electricity prices
over the last four, four-ish years.
Um, and you're starting to see that come through
and customer bills now, both that plus, uh,
a shift in our regulated return that came in, uh,
on the 1st of April this year.
So both movements, uh, have come
through in electricity bills, uh, recently. One more
Question. So, so how's
the fast track legislation helping you guys
to fast track your investment and the port progress as well?
Yeah, at the moment, we're seeing generators, um,
putting projects into the, the fast track.
Most of our projects at the moment, um,
are investments in existing, um, plant, uh,
sorry, existing infrastructure.
Uh, and so we haven't been, um,
utilizing the fast track process.
We've, we've definitely foresee the need to do it, um,
historically to develop new transmission
and to meet this future we are going to need
to build new transmission.
It's about seven to 10 years from the decision to do it,
to it being commissioned.
In my opinion, that's going to be too slow.
And so we will be utilizing things like the fast rate,
we will have to develop very hard on our social license
and convincing Kiwis to make the trade off, um,
some lovely parts of the country.
We'll see more infrastructure.
Um, uh, so that's a lot
of the work we have under the way now is preparing
for those conversations.
And we're out in the regions having those discussions.
Now to oppo that Michelle mentioned, we engaged heavily with
customers, uh, all around the country, uh,
to get their feedback now heading towards this future.
And I think we have to do that.
'cause fundamentally we are an asset owner of assets
that last for multiple generations.
So that work, that important work on the forward thinking,
the possible futures,
and there'll be various scenarios
that will be, um, developed.
We're right in the process of the early days
of doing this work, uh,
and already right at the forefront, um, the, the team
who are leading it are engaging with communities
and, um, generators
and the electricity, um, distribution businesses
and large industrial users
and communities to get a sense of what the need will be.
And of course, you know, trying to anticipate
what something might be in 2050
and then work back, you know, you're never going
to be absolutely right.
And there'll be various multiple different
avenues that you could go down.
They are all pointing though to a need for an investment
and increase, um, energy usage.
So there's a piece around
how do we move there on a no regrets,
but also understanding what needs to change in order for us
to get there in the future.
Crazy. Thank you, Mr. Chair.
And just, I suppose, building on that question, um,
looking at, um, page 11,
you identified supporting industrial transformation, um,
and the fact that electrification of process heat
and industrial operations will require, you know,
transmission, um, infrastructure, which obviously
positions transfer, um, as a key partner in enabling, um,
new industries and supporting just basic competitiveness
of, um, existing ones as well.
So what are you seeing in industrial users?
Um, electrifying as, as you said, gas availability, titans,
do you have all the levers, um, that you need, uh, to
function and support that
or, uh, particularly in relation
to those industrial transformations?
Um, what else is sort of missing, um,
the current regulatory environment?
Um, you know, is that, are there any sort
of delays in those grid grid connections because of that?
Is there, um, not just adding to sort of system cost,
but putting a, putting a bit of a hand break on any of that?
Uh, that, that is a multilayered
Question. Sorry. Know,
And I'll, uh, I'll do my best.
Um, and actually it's, it's well put
because, um, what has emerge from your questions, the fact
that we are a system, we are part of a system,
and the system has to move in concert 24 7 3 6 5,
and when we look ahead, it has to plan, uh, effectively
to deliver for our industries, both
to transition existing ones and to attract new ones.
Um, and so the, the challenge
for us is ensuring that, uh, we are close enough
to customers to know the timing of their plans.
Yeah. Uh, and we're working extremely hard to get closer
to the industrials around the country.
EDBs are doing the same to get, um, sorry,
electricity distribution businesses
who deliver the last mile, um, network, uh, to customers
and work with a lot of commercial businesses, um, uh,
greenhouses glass around the country that are starting
to look to transition, for example.
They're working very hard to get close to them so
that you can plan because a customer might be able
to transition, you know,
undertake its capital investment program
and transition in a two year period,
for example, or three year period.
Uh, we might need longer
because we might need a resource consent.
Uh, we might need, uh,
to order long lead items from overseas in a world
that is electrifying and timeframes are pushing out.
So, uh, we've got to get a lot closer, um, to customers and,
and plan for this transition so that we can line people up,
uh, and deliver for them. Mm-hmm.
And I think the other thing, just to add to
that is maybe you should talk to the work
that we've been doing in Western Bay.
Plenty. Well, it's not just us on our own.
We're actually working with
Spoke to that. Yeah. So it,
it, it's a good point, Michelle.
We, we are working very hard to develop relationships
with the distribution businesses
and plan whole regions together.
Um, the recent one
of the Commerce Commission has approved a major capital
investment for us, uh, to the tune of $83 million, um, uh,
to support the, the growing west of Bay
of Plenty Western Bay of Plenty region.
We did a combined effort with Powerco,
uh, a couple of years ago.
We sat down with Powerco, uh,
and said, what is the infrastructure
that best supports this, um, these cities
and these communities to grow and thrive going forward?
And we worked out what the, um, a long list of options
where we consulted heavily
and engaged heavily with the communities
and businesses in that area, got their feedback.
And it was only once we had the right, uh,
investment program in place that we sat down
and said, now how do we work this into our regulatory
framework and who, who should build what powerco build
that should transfer, build that?
Uh, so, um, and more
and more, uh, we are doing that, sitting with distributors
and starting with what's best for these customers,
what delivers the most secure, affordable energy
for them now and in the future.
And, uh, we're doing that at the moment in Queenstown,
working with Aurora and Power Net, uh, down there.
Uh, we've done a plan for KU in,
in Southland, um, with them.
And, uh, this initial work starting in other
areas of, of the country.
I've got some done quite a bit of work in Northland as well.
So, um, uh, you know, we've, in the future, we think
that regional planning approach
is gonna be really, really helpful.
Um, and it, it'll also capture,
it'll capture some more distributed energy.
I know Powerco has got a lot of, um,
small scale solar looking to connect to its network,
and that's been taken into being able
to be taken into account,
and that just shaves a bit of the investment off the, uh,
off the grid, which is great for customers.
It gets us much closer to the end consumer, you know,
and that community who, um, who are best placed to, um,
give us insight in terms of what's needed and why,
and what they think the future growth aspects, um,
prospects are for their communities as well.
So we can be much more informed
and linked up decision making.
And that was kind of my follow up question about regional
planning and whether you were moving to that
and whether there was any kind of areas
or obstacles, um, in your framework, you know, and,
and the way that you operate to be able to, um,
kind of lead that work.
Um, but you also mentioned that you've, you've kind
of covered that, but you also mentioned those international,
um, uh, pressures insofar as a world that's a world that's,
you know, rapidly electrifying, how do we fear, um,
in the pecking order and having access to what you need
to be able to, to enable those transformations?
Very good question. What are we doing to make sure
that we're, we're in the good supply chains
and stuff? Yeah. Okay.
So we are, um, uh,
a small population,
large country, actually a large land mess.
We all talk, we talk about ourselves as a small country.
We're actually quite large, physically, hence an expensive,
uh, grid, hence, um, just not many people.
Uh, and so, um, you know, relative to, uh, other nations,
our ability to, um, to drive down international prices
and leverage our scale for, uh, good, uh,
procurement outcomes is more limited.
Um, that said, that said, we do a, um, I'm, again,
as new CEO been impressed
with the procurement approach at Trans Power.
We do comply, uh, with the government procurement rules,
um, on occasions.
We, we do divert from those
where it's commercially since we've done that recently
to procure, um, uh, the long leads
for the cable HVDC cable replacement.
So we've committed, uh, on the nearly committed, uh, we've,
we've booked a place in the, in the, um, uh,
procurement program for the production of HVDC cables
and a ship to lay them seven years in advance, um,
through a very, uh, good piece of commercial work, actually.
Yeah. Um, so the, the, there's lots of examples like that
where, um, we'll go
through a traditional process every time we can, um, uh,
to make sure we're getting the right value for Kiwis,
but sometimes getting the right value means diverted from
that process and, and hitting on a moment
where you can get yourself into a, um, production slum ahead
of other countries, um, effectively.
Yeah. So we're getting more and more flexible.
We have to get more
and more flexible in the way we procure goods,
including holding more stock, ordering long leads,
further in advance with customers, um, support, um,
to ensure that we can deliver the timeframes.
I mean, we saw global supply change disrupted
during COVID, you, you all know that.
And we probably all thought we've returned back
to the old, the old normal.
Well, as we know, that hasn't happened
with geopolitical risks and so forth.
And as you've correctly pointed out, the
demand from the rest of the world for, um, uh,
energy growth, et cetera.
So we've had to rethink about supply chain
and manage our own, um, stocks
and repairs, um, inventory on that basis as well.
What, what really weighs on, on, on my mind is,
is the fact that I think if we, we live in a, in our,
in our regulatory environment is, is endeavoring
to set us up for economic perfection, just in time delivery.
Mm-hmm. Just enough delivery.
And, and here's the rub in a world that's,
that's electrifying.
Yeah. And at the bottom end of it,
just in time will be too late.
Just enough will be too little. Yeah.
Um, and we are really focused on how we can, um,
uh, stay within our regulatory framework, but,
but meet tho that context, that shift in context.
So we're working hard on, on, through the kapu program
through making the case for a future grid blueprint,
long-term grid blueprint, vision
and framework that says, this is
where we think we're going out to 2050 to enable this future
in the next 10 to 15 years.
We think that that means these are the no regrets
programs we should just get on, get on with and enable,
because as we electrify,
the electricity system will either be a constraint
or an a neighbor of growth.
Yeah. There's no middle ground. Yeah. Which
Just raises my, if you can indulge me, Mr.
Which, um, what do you, what sort of thoughts
or what plans have you got in place in regards of, um,
that sort of thermal and storage?
So, um, Question, sorry, but just,
Well, no, our, our role on the system is
to inform the system.
We can't develop, um, uh, generation ourselves.
So the system operations role within transparent issues,
a number of, um, reports on, uh, various frequencies.
There's a monthly energy security outlook.
We, uh, we issue,
and then there's the security
supply assessment that goes out.
It's a 10 year look forward, goes out annually. Mm-hmm.
Um, and in those we point out effectively where we,
we foresee there might be a gap, um, in the, in the need
for, to cover two, two areas of electricity supply risk.
One is, um, what we call a dr you all know, is a dry winter.
Um, it's a long sustained period
where there's not enough water coming into
the, uh, hydro lakes.
And the system gets a bit tight in fuel supply.
Uh, that can be a three month period.
In theory, it can be a six month period.
And with climate change, who knows.
So, um, uh, so we, we forecast how much fuel needs
to be on hand effectively, or what the gap might be,
and then the industry responds to that.
Mm-hmm. Uh, and the other is capacity.
So it's the ability to meet peaks, uh, on a daily basis, um,
in, in consumer demand.
So, um,
and again, it's a, it's a different, uh, set of,
uh, of risks.
Uh, we forecast and again, the industry responds,
uh, to those.
And, uh, as Michelle mentioned in our opening remarks this
year, we were pretty direct about, um, the risks,
for example, of the retirement of the,
the third Huntley unit.
Mm-hmm. Um, and the need for the retention of
that just, and it's just analytics.
It's just showing here are the risk curves with it. Mm-hmm.
And here are the risk curves without it,
and the risk curves without that unit looked,
um, quite different.
Mm-hmm. Uh, for, uh, risk to security of supply for that,
um, winter risk. So
In terms of storage thought, is that something
that you turn your mind? We,
Yeah, we think a lot about it.
Yeah. Um, about fuel storage, uh, spent.
And we inform the market, um, right now, um,
just to alleviate some immediate
concerns to the extent you have them.
Um, the lakes are, uh, well above average.
There's been good snow packs, so the snow's good,
we'll get some good, um, summer melt into the lakes.
And there's, uh, two terawatt hours
of coal sitting at Huntley, which, um, uh,
which makes me feel a lot more comfortable
than this time last year.
So it's a, it's a great piece
of work from the Gen Taylors. Thanks,
Mr. It's a, it's
an, an item that is of, um,
high interest obviously for Kiwis,
but actually it's also of a high interest
to the transparent board.
Yes. Um, so it would be at every meeting it will be
an item on the agenda in some way, say shape or form.
'cause we are very focused on monitoring it,
but also as, um, James has said,
and I think under James leadership,
we've just seen a real strengthening of the transparency
and reporting around that.
Um, and clarity in plain English so that, um, so
that the, the market can respond.
Now just colleagues, there are quite a lot of questions,
which is essentially sucking off this one.
So we'll keep doing that. And then I've got a
primary over the primary, right.
Well, yeah. I've got about a hundred too, so we,
we're probably not gonna get through everything we've got,
so we'll do our best. Right.
Yes. Uh, James, you were talking about the dry years, uh,
and um, you mentioned in the start around the,
the, the gap in thermal.
Um, and I'm glad you mentioned that
'cause I think it's been mentioned in a number of reports.
The Frontier Economics report also highlighted that, uh,
it's also a focus of the government reforms around trying
to beef up that, uh, thermal capacity for dry use.
I'm just, uh, keen to get your assessment on what,
whether you think those reforms
will actually make a difference.
What's, uh, trans power's role in actually
providing more capacity in those dry years.
Um, your thoughts on that would be helpful.
The reforms cover, uh, sorry.
The, the Frontier Economics Report cover a wide range of,
of issues in this space.
And, um, uh,
and then governments picked up, uh, some work streams
through MB and we are contributing heavily to those.
So we have staff seconded in there
for providing a lot of analytics and support.
'cause we get to see the market every day.
Um, uh, so we're working, you know, hand in glove
with MB on the follow up.
Um, uh, sort of actions from that report,
from our perspective, you know, uh, we support any activity
that, um, will, uh, ensure a secure supply
of electricity to Kiwis.
Uh, we haven't got a, we haven't got a horse in the race
or a dog in the fight on, on who builds what
and where we just wanna see, um, uh, the best form
of energy come to market that can ensure, uh, a secure
and affordable, uh, supply to Kiwis.
Given we've sort of nailed the sustainability side of the,
of the equation, we're 90% great, 95 soon, so. Mm-hmm.
And, uh, just to follow up question
from my colleague, Carlos.
Um, you was talking about seven to 10 years
for development of projects.
Mm-hmm. If you use fast track, what can we get that down to
in terms of the speeding up the time to
Construct? And I mean, a real
stretch target
for me would be five years, five years.
I think the reality of, of this game as the social license
process, um, and, uh, fast track or
otherwise, communities are, uh, kiwis
and we are gonna need, I'm gonna be asking you now for,
to support with leadership
the trade-offs that are necessary.
I will be out there, my team will be out there.
Lots of people are already out there talking
to communities about the need
to develop our infrastructure to support the future.
Uh, it's become pressing
because of the, uh, the fall and gas supply.
We are going to have to lean into this. Mm-hmm.
Uh, and, um, and I,
and I say that with a great deal of, um, humility
and sympathy for the communities who don't want
to look at wind turbines and don't want
to look at transmission towers.
I, I understand that, but that's a big part of our future.
Wonderful. Thank you. So
I'm gonna pick up one there,
which you talked about in response to, um,
Tracy's questions there around, um,
the regional side of things.
One of the things, you talk to communities
around the country, there are a quite wide range of,
uh, electricity prices.
Uh, and there's also issues around, um,
uh, capacity to get Mm.
Generation and you've, you've mentioned a few
of those in response to, um, uh, written questions.
You said sort of, uh, obviously the Queenstown area,
Otago South and Wire app.
I know Northlands in that category as well.
What's your, what,
can you give us some comment on why prices
vary as much as they do?
Whether that's a transmission issue or what it is, um,
and also what we can do in those areas, which are
with higher prices, is there anything that can do,
and whose responsibility is it to try
and even those out a little bit?
Because that is significant cost to those regions.
The, um, you gotta, uh, break the system down into its,
uh, into its supply chain is probably the best way.
So apologies if this gets a bit, um, uh,
pointy headed, but um, that's okay.
I don't mind that. Yeah. Yeah.
We're proud nerds at, um, so you start, you start
with generation and that trades in a,
in a competitive market, and every half hour at nodes all
around the country, the prices set at that node,
the lowest cost, um, bid
that will meet demand at that node.
So it's designed to hit the lowest cost price, um,
uh, each half hour.
Just be clear that that is energy
for anywhere in the country.
Uh, so nodes, so it's,
there's 168 of these nodes all around.
The country's traded at each
of those points around the country.
This is the geographic difference, right? Mm-hmm.
Tends to be cheaper in the south than in the north.
'cause in the south, um, uh, there's all the, the hydro dams
and, uh, and the higher cost generations further north.
Um, and generation does tend
to flow north over the HVDC more often than not
about three quarters of the time.
That's starting to change, it's starting
to flow south more and more.
And we foresee that happening more and more.
'cause a lot of the development pipeline is in the north.
So going back to my supply chain description, so the,
the generation system, uh,
sets the price at 168 nodes, uh, around the country
for a wholesale price.
Wholesale prices have risen in the last few years
as a consequence of that fallen gas supply
and an increase in the cost of gas.
That's, that sets the marginal price at nodes, um,
um, from time to time.
And so we have seen some upward pressure on wholesale
prices, then it has to be delivered to, uh, distributors
and large customers by transparent.
Um, our prices are set
by the transmission pricing methodology.
The methodology shifted in 20,
I think it was implemented in 2023, uh,
the transmission pricing methodology.
And, um,
it moved towards a benefits based charging approach.
Uh, and more of the costs, um, uh,
are allocated on a benefits based approach.
Um, that has shifted, uh, the costs, uh, compared
to the past, um, more towards load customers.
Um, and,
and has increased the relative weighting of cost
to the more extreme parts of the network.
So the Northlands, the East coasts
and West Coast, south Island, for example, um, some,
some higher deprivation areas have seen their, their costs
increase, um, with the benefits based, um, approach.
The, there's an enormous amount of detail in how the, um,
uh, costs are allocated and calculated.
Um, and our, the work we're doing now,
going out to the system and, and, you know,
and talking to stakeholders and,
and running a formal process for an operational review of
that is to say we, we can't, it's not transparent's role
to change the, the policy setting around the TPM,
that's a role for the electricity authority, but we can try
and simplify it and remove some of the complexity so
that new investors can get a better
and more accurate line of sight on
what their cost will be when they invest.
So generation wholesale prices set 168 nodes
around the country reflecting, uh, the generation local
to them, more local to them, transmission regulated return
and WAC at an average cost of capital, uh,
with a benefits pace based approach, which has shifted
in the last couple of years.
Distribution, uh, down into 29, um,
electricity distribution companies around the country
also regulated WAC as a natural monopoly.
So regulated returns five year, um, pricing period,
just like we've described for transmission.
And they have some flex, um, over their pricing approach.
But as a general policy setting,
they are being guided heavily towards, um, uh, a sort
of a user pays business based approach
to send a pricing signal to customers, um, uh, that's more,
more reflective of the utilization.
Um, and then retailers package it all up
and actually deliver the, the bill to customers
and they'll add their costs, uh, for doing that.
All of that means, um, prices do differ around the country,
reflective of that geography, the distance from generation,
um, and the need in that area.
Uh, so it's, it's, it's incredibly economically rational.
Um, but, but, uh, complex and yeah.
Hard for customers to navigate. So
Just to finish off, and then I'm gonna go to Scott.
Um, the, in terms
of essentially the further you are away in terms
of the distribution gets more expensive.
Mm-hmm. And there's not much way around that.
And if an area say, so for example,
obviously the Queenstown area growing very fast
needs more capacity that's gonna cost,
but then they've got more people to cover that goes.
So, so that happens.
Second thing is you mentioned social license. Yeah.
So pre what you're saying that 168 nodes,
which I hadn't quite caught onto to
before, the more, um,
generation capacity there is in any given area,
seeing some nodes there, the likelihood is that the price
of the energy in that area will tend to be low
and it will be if that energy was not
generated in that area.
Yes. So there's a bit of social license going, Hey,
we build this wind farm, we build this, um, yeah, this
solar farm, whatever it is in your area,
it should push your prices down to that area a bit.
Re remembering it's important to, um, uh, take it.
It's a very dynamic market
and, uh, you might build there and then build there.
The, the impacts flow through over time.
It's not an instant. Yeah. There's no instant fix here.
Um, yeah, if there was a silver bullet would've been
screaming out, can comment
Because it is a market, It's not
Controlled. Is
it Suck on this one, otherwise it, i I can suck.
I can definitely stop on a number of the points.
Just wanted someone, Your comment. I, I,
I'll take Carlos just quickly and then,
and then I go to Scott because I know
Scott's gonna be long. Based
On what you've mentioned just now, does it mean
that people in Auckland will suffer a higher cost of power?
Because obviously most
of the renewable energy in the future, uh,
will not be based in Auckland.
So will, will that happen?
Victor is our largest customer for transmission charges.
Um, uh, it's, it's hard
to pick how regional pricing, uh, will develop,
but prices will increase, uh, through time, um,
everywhere in the country to meet the need going forward.
It is still forecast by, um, most experts that
as we electrify, whilst your electricity costs will rise,
your total energy bill will fall.
Yes. But my question is, will regional being affected
because we changing our model for fossil energy
to become renewable.
So will people in Auckland will, will, will it
to have a high cost of power?
Uh, no more so than anybody else? I don't don't.
So you reckon they will be the same
as the rest of the rest
It'll rise. It,
They were the same. I think the rest of
the country would be very happy.
But that's what I'm saying because we say that, you know,
the region have those renewable energy infrastructure will,
will, will have a lower cost.
I just want to Sure. Oakland not suffer.
I Think you might find equally likely the
reverse why I ask the question.
Yeah. It's, it's, it's the west coast, the Northlands, the,
you know, the east coast, which
ones actually suffering at the
moment. It's like the high price of
Scott. Thank you.
Um, so coming back
to the transmission pricing methodology, which is, you know,
we understand there's some real issues there.
Where are you at
or could you give us some more detail thinking about battery
energy systems where there's, you know,
shared connection assets that, you know,
we are not necessarily valuing them
in the way in which they're used
or in the, in the Northland um,
Auckland issue.
We, you know, the, the costs fall in a place that
the benefits aren't really, um, the benefits are more
and more, you could argue.
So the, the, the, where are we at
with the transmission pricing methodology changes?
'cause it took so long to get there last time and,
and we need some change.
So our mind you, our role on this is just
to operate the transmission pricing methodology
and we've launched an operational hub view, which is, uh,
endeavoring to simplify, um, the methodology.
So it's more predictable for customers, for the EDBs,
for large industrials, for generators,
particularly those looking to invest, you know, we want
to enable them to have a number in their model
that they can rely on, um, uh,
before they make their commitment So, uh, we're,
we're running that process now
and set up, um, you know, working groups to work
through the detail that it is very detailed.
Um, with, with batteries, we've, we've got
one large scale battery connected to the grid right now.
There's a, there's a, um, a reasonably large scale in,
in the Waikato, but one large,
one a hundred megawatt battery, um,
Meridian up at Royal Kaka.
Um, and I've, uh, been up, I was lucky enough to attend the,
the opening, um, of that.
And I think we're, it's too early to say
that we know exactly how batteries will integrate,
um, into the grid.
We know at a principled level.
Um, but the detail
and the operational detail of how, um,
batteries will support the system going forward of the, uh,
the challenge, some of the challenges in working in a, in a,
with more and more batteries.
And there will be more. Looking at the, our pipeline,
there's I think, eight to 900 megawatts
of batteries, you know, coming through.
Um, we are seeing some operational challenges, uh, from, um,
that battery meridians, um, uh, being brave and,
and put the first one in.
And it's learning. Um, and, and we're all watching
and supporting them hoping, uh, you know, that, um, uh,
some issues will get ironed out
and the batteries will,
will become a big part of our future.
Um, distributed batteries and,
and storage generally, uh,
will be a huge part of our future.
It's just learning to integrate them well into the system.
Uh, and, and we are at the start of that journey.
Um, nowhere near the middle of it.
Um, you're still on BA batteries? Hmm?
You still on batteries or you wanna go somewhere else?
Still on? Well, no, no, it wasn't batteries.
It was transmission pricing. Okay. Methodology.
But, um, but it,
it does lean into the infrastructure deficit
that you talked about earlier,
that we all know is a big infrastructure deficit for our
electrifying, electrifying the economy.
What are, what really, do you have a concern about the
materiality of that, given the global supply chains,
Meridian's had some issues, um, getting, getting bits of kit
with the build out that you're talking about.
How do you, how, how are we placed?
How do you, how do you think we are placed by managing that?
Oh, I'll, I'll start off.
I mean, I think we are,
it's an advantage that we have to do our five year reporting
and also thinking out to 10.
And because we have that long of assets.
So all the work we've, that transfer, um, has been doing
for the last probably 15 years.
And also the current work we are doing on Kapu actually
feeds into that.
Uh, we are receiving, as I mentioned earlier,
around a hundred requests a year for those who wish to, um,
connect to the gym, to the grid, to the grid.
Uh, and so we are not seeing a shortage of those
who are looking to invest.
I think there is a, there's a piece of work though, around
how do we give as much clarity to investors to,
to enable that to continue.
And a number of those things have all been mentioned, um,
me today actually in that regard.
So we've got pretty well set out,
or we've got very clear plans for the next, um, five years,
and then even after that.
So as you get, obviously, the further out you get,
the less detailed your planning.
So, so that's why it's really important
that we are doing this work and doing it in connection with,
um, other, with the regulators, plus also with large, um,
users and the EDBs
'cause our best place to know that as well.
Mm. And, and I'd add sort of more operationally
that on a day-to-day basis, um, not day to day, month
to month basis, uh, assets get shared
around the industry, but someone has a problem.
Um, the alert goes out is where the request goes out,
and the industry responds.
Uh, we carry a bunch of spares for, for our system.
Um, we've recently received back, uh, from Meridian a, um,
transformer, we a loan to them for several years.
Um, uh, it's now back in our spare set.
Um, so the industry responds really well in an emergency.
The whole industry looks to that region
and the office of support, uh, um, you know, uh,
continuous and ongoing.
Mm-hmm. There really is a all for one, one for all moment.
And, and it's the same on an operational basis,
and we're gonna need to do more of that.
And we are having a bit of a think about, um, uh, about
what more we could do to, to hold some lot,
some more longer lead items
and things as we, uh, as we see the grid develop, um,
that others could then access if they need them.
Um, there are constraints on that and,
and under the, um, regulations about us just holding, yeah.
Holding spears that in theory, um,
we can't make a case for immediately.
Mm-hmm. Um, so we're thinking about how we approach that.
Mm-hmm. I, I think there's a general comment
around if you think about this industry is heavily regulated
and rightly so, but a lot of the regulations
or rules were developed in a different time.
Mm-hmm. And so now we are moving into a different future.
And so we are starting to therefore,
and it's probably not unexpected
or unusual that you start, start
to rub up against some rules
that actually aren't serving us well as we move forward.
So, but when you come to TPM, uh,
'cause we have done quite a lot of consulting on this, um,
our consultation on this,
and you'll get the feedback that no one likes it
and they want to change it, and they want to change this.
And that's at a very kind of high level.
I see our job as being collating all of that in information
and then, 'cause we arrive in the center
of it all understanding, well,
how would you bring, what would you change?
So it's all very well to say that something's not working,
but what would you replace it with?
And then working that through in a really logical fashion
because what are the unintended consequences?
Until you, until you, until you have started to get down to
that level of granularity
and specificity, um, you really don't know.
So that's, uh, the work that we are doing now. Okay.
That's great. If that makes sense.
Can I just ask a Question?
Question about the, the intermittent generation, um, issues.
'cause it's been raised with me by people
who generation's not quite as intermittent.
Um, the first comes, first served approach.
How does, can you just walk us through that?
So this is the situation where, what I've been told is
that if you put in a certain amount of capacity,
if you use all capacity in a particular part
of the system up, um, by say solar pa, particularly solar
because it's, it's relatively low generation compared
to its theoretical maximum that can squeeze out,
for example, geothermal.
Um, which obviously is a much higher,
virtually a hundred percent efficiency.
Can you just walk us through how that works?
And also, there's some comments that, um,
have been made about the whole thing about a, a maximum,
a maximum amount of that intimate generation in the system
before the system starts getting, um, vulnerable.
Uh, I can't remember exactly the words, uh, words
that have been used, but, or that you've used
as an organization, but there's a point at which, um,
if something goes wrong, um, the system can,
so can you just walk us through those two issues? So
Is your first one around the limitations in the system
for new generation to be added in a
particular area? Yeah. Which
Means it prevents it. Yeah. Yeah.
So potentially it's a first come first serve.
Yeah. And you, you, you pick something that's intimate,
it gives you, you know, 16%
or thereabouts iss the number I've been told, uh,
of its theoretical maximum.
And it squeezes that something give you 95, 90 8%.
Yeah. It's a, the system we run for,
for new connections is actually first ready, first served.
So we are engaged heavily with customers who, um,
so new generators who are, uh, endeavoring to connect
to the system and creating a a having a realistic
conversation with them about, um, when they will be ready
to connect, uh, to ensure we understand their timing
and can connect them, uh, at the time that that fits.
And, and, and lots of, um, customers have great ambitions
for, uh, the rapid development of their project.
Um, we're all optimists and we are,
and to be a developer, you have to be right.
Business development, you've got to be a, an optimist.
Uh, and we we're ambitious for the pace
of connection, so we wanna support them.
Um, but realistically we, we work through that
with the customer and then ensure our,
our processes meet the realistic need.
Um, uh, once, so as,
as capacity is used up as it were occupied to,
to earlier comment, yes.
The next, um, customer,
and this is, uh, uh, something that flies into a, uh,
an issue in the TPM that we're working through.
The first mover disadvantage. So the
First mover, First mover disadvantage,
Once the capacity gone
is utilized, the next one's in trouble. Yeah.
The next one wants to build a, a,
let's say it's a GF will plant to, to your, um, example.
Um, they will need to fund the grid upgrade, um, right back
to the point where the capacity can meet it, um, uh,
for their plan.
Uh, so it's sort of, they pay, uh,
potentially depending on the, on the area
and the work needed, uh, quite significant marginal cost,
uh, to, uh, to develop that part of the system.
Um, and,
and then a subsequent, um, uh, user may be able to connect
and not pay as much
because the bulk of the sort of enabler work has been done
by the person who has suffered the first mover disadvantage.
So, um, there's some work to do for us there in how we, um,
uh, think about that in the, in the TPM.
Um, it's something that we know the commerce commissions
and both the commerce commission
and the electricity authority, uh, uh, are very aware
of in thinking about 'cause no one wants, uh, to put off
or slow the pace of, of, um, of development.
Um, you're right, the different, uh,
different technologies have a different,
what's known as capacity factor.
Um, geothermal, uh, new Zealand's incredible gift, um,
and world leading capability
and geothermal, uh, is extraordinary.
And, and geothermal plant will operate at,
at a capacity factor of 95% plus.
It is, its known as base load.
Um, uh, so it's, it's an extraordinary gift that, um,
we would, we at transfer would love to see,
um, uh, leveraged.
'cause it's nice and secure. Turn it on.
We only had geothermal would be great. Yeah.
Lots and lots of geothermal. We'd love to see it.
There are trade offs with geothermal as well.
Happy to, you know, talk about those wind
where New Zealand is again, blessed
with an incredible wind resource.
Um, uh, you know, we are getting
capacity factors in New Zealand at 40, 40, 40 5%.
Some are even saying that, um, with some
of the larger turbines being looked at now,
they may get a 50% capacity factor, um, which is
again, world-leading.
Um, our solar resource
and the land of the long white cloud, um, is,
is not quite as world-leading.
Um, and capacity factors for solar are down at
that somewhere between 15 to 19, maybe 20%
as technology advances.
So, um, you know, they all, they all have an important role
to play in the mix.
The thing that is needed for security is
what we call dispatchable energy.
Energy. You can control and release when you need it.
Hydro does that. Gas has traditionally done that, still does
that just in smaller quantities.
Coal can do that within different timeframes.
Plant takes a bit longer to warm through for, for coal
and batteries going back to the battery conversation.
Batteries will do that. Mm-hmm.
Um, going forward, that's what's needed to release, um, uh,
release energy into the system when it's needed
and hold it back when it's not.
And over time, we see the role of the hydro lakes shifting
increasingly into that.
As more wind and solar
and geothermal come into the system,
the lakes will naturally be held higher.
Um, the other, um, fuels will get dispatched, uh,
ahead, um, in the system.
The lakes will be held higher
and they will provide, um, more of the deep energy storage,
uh, for dry winters
and more of the, um, capacity, um, uh,
the capacity need on a daily basis.
Uh, their role shift over, you know, 10, 15 years
as the build out, um, progresses.
Uh, so that's order build, uh,
the maximum level of intermittency.
Um, Mr. Chair,
Can I just ask a supple question?
No, no, no, no. I still, I still want,
I still want the rest of my question
answered first, then you can have yours.
Are we making Progress? We are making progress.
We are making plenty of progress. Mr. Court.
Um, the maximum, uh, intermittency look, it can be,
it can be managed as long as we manage our hydro lakes well
and, and use that stored energy that the,
the ability they provide for stored energy
and for now the coal stock pile, um, manage it well.
Um, we can manage, um, inter the increase in intermittency.
We need to ensure we are investing
and we are doing a lot of work, um,
in the appropriate protections, schemes,
and systems, uh, around the grid so that we don't have, um,
you know, if there's a sudden drop off in wind,
we don't experience something along the lines of a Spain
or Portugal, um, event.
We working closely, uh, with, um, uh,
with those utilities over there to understand that detail.
There's a lot of stuff in the media,
but the detail of what happened so
that we can ensure we don't experience a similar thinking
and our system is, is much better placed, uh, to, uh,
to handle those events already.
So, so just to finish that, and then I've go to Simon.
So we are effectively though paying for two,
two systems in a way, the intermittent system
and then the backup system.
Yes. Every nation will get to this point.
Every single nation in the world will get to this point,
whereas pre until such time as there's a re uh,
a new technology, a lot of countries are going nuclear,
but there's a new technology that is clean,
burning, clean, yeah.
Uh, uh, clean production, uh,
that can be dispatched. Um,
But if you went back struggle with it 10 years
or so, maybe 15, then essentially pretty well everything
that we had was not intermittent.
No, no, no.
We, 15 years ago, we were 80% renewable still. No, I didn't say
Renewable. I said not
intermittent.
Yeah. Uh, okay.
So 80% of it was, was intermittent. Well, 70% thermal.
Geothermal. It was hydro and thermal.
Yeah. Hydro. Um, there was wind in the system. Well,
Okay, well, going back, I'm trying to go back far enough
that we essentially didn't do wind.
Yeah. Okay. Then it was a hydro system.
Um, a geothermal system wasn't
anywhere near the scale it is now.
So yeah. More of the system was
dispatchable, not intermittent. Yeah.
Cool. Sign on. Yeah, thanks.
I'll come back to the, um,
last first mover disadvantage, um, question.
So one of the things that I've heard from those seeking a
good connection or proposing a generation, particularly
to supply like a, a,
a unique customer like generation to supply here, to supply
a, a data center over there
or something like that, is that, um, they've been
ob obviously transparent has its, um,
grid connection prioritization list and your CapEx program.
But if they don't fit into that
and how can they get a connection?
And, and what I've heard is that, um, they would be willing
to enter into a, into a cost recovery arrangement where,
uh, they could organize private funding inception special
could vehicle to fund it on the basis that, uh,
with trans power support, uh, that, um,
that investment is essentially bought back
by trans power over a, over a suitable timeframe.
Mm-hmm. And that cost is able to be allocated to others who,
who, who benefit from from it over time.
Is that something you've considered? Is
That Yeah, we have a number of, um, customers looking at,
uh, particularly self-build, if you like.
Um, and we're supportive of that where, um,
where it can support the customer
to accelerate their program,
and then we can acquire the asset, um, uh, once built,
we do need it to be built to our specifications
so it can integrate with the grid, um, uh, successfully.
Uh, but we're, um,
not defensive about that at all. It's, yeah.
And are there any regulatory barriers or,
or other barriers that, that are making that difficult?
Is there anything that the government might be thinking
about that could actually, um, you signal
an enabling environment for that?
Um, again, the, the social license, the,
the consenting land access regime remains a challenge.
Um, what we've seen so far from those
that have done this one started and then stopped
because, uh, it's harder than it looks,
um, uh, to get it done.
Um, and another has delivered a, a successful, um, project,
uh, and connected their, their plant to the grid, um, uh,
and, you know, highly successfully.
So people are, are working through it.
It's a new model, so people are learning
as they, as they go.
Um, getting access to, uh,
the supply chain can be challenging for people.
We, you know, we've, we've got a good procurement function.
We talked about it earlier. We're well
organized, we're very experienced.
We know the suppliers around the world so we can access,
um, uh, materials.
And generally what customers who have looked at it have,
have found it so far,
and this could change, um, is
that they can't develop it any more quickly
than we can mm-hmm.
Once they actually get into execution on it.
Uh, it's, it's, yeah.
Scott, Um, yeah, sorry.
The other observation on that, if I'm, if I may,
which is actually important from a, um,
commercial perspective, is tends to end up being developed.
We contract our work out in the large construction
and contracting businesses around the country,
it's going to the same mm-hmm.
Resource. So hence that my point, that the, you know, the,
the ability to go any faster is, is constrained
by the amount of construction resource available. Yeah.
Thank you. Thank, Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um,
Thank you.
Um, we will be spending some time
with the infrastructure commission later today for scrutiny.
Obviously, we assume that you're doing some work
around the draft, um, national infrastructure plan,
obviously, um, the sort of keep it sort of kit
and infrastructure that you are involved in as a key part
of, of that to, so to what extent are you sort
of applying some synergistic approach to ensure that well
and appreciates a draft at this stage,
but what work are you doing to inform the approach to ensure
that actually there is resilience capacity
and also the infrastructure, um, needs are meant for,
for New Zealand moving forward?
Uh, we work closely with the infrastructure commission.
Um, uh, I think Jeff
and I have gotta catch up in a, in a week or two.
Um, but our team has, has given a lot
of input into, into the pain.
Um, and our te kapu work, Jeff's connected
with our te Kapu work, our long term thinking about the,
um, grid blueprint.
Um, uh, so yeah, we work closely, uh,
we integrate our thinking into theirs
and we lean on their, to support ours.
There's, um, uh, and we,
and we take different lenses to different pieces of work
as a, as our form
of fuel becomes an economic enabler.
Um, uh, we look, we look at what it might be able
to do in te Kapu.
So we're looking and hearing from people about
what electricity could fuel in the future.
Um, the national infrastructure plan, um, uh,
looks at, uh, what the current pathway is, I guess,
for the country and sort of sizes for that.
So slightly different lenses.
Um, but, and you're connected, uh, in terms of inputs, I
Mean, the future proofing aspect is
obviously important mm-hmm.
At this stage, but what would you, despite the fact
that you've got projects underway
at this stage in the process, have you identified any sort
of wholesale
or systemic change that you would need to undertake outside
of existing projects?
Not at this stage in terms of physical in investment, um,
in terms of our regulation, um,
and the cost recovery model, um,
we think in this still doing work,
we've not made this case at all.
We're, we're an evidence-based business, so, you know, we,
we need to evidence this,
but, um, we think there may be a case, uh,
for the electricity grid, um, to be funded
for a degree, a small degree of anticipatory investment
to stay ahead of the curve, not a step potentially behind,
and be that constraint on growth.
So that would require some shift in,
in the regulatory model.
And we've been, um, doing a lot of work on
that in our PU program.
It's, it's, should
We explain practically What that means?
I, I think you should, because you did mention that issue,
but the, just in time, meaning it's not gonna be on time.
Mm-hmm. And that, that's obviously
what you're referring to. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
So the, I'll have a go and you can add in the details.
So like big sort of picture, um, we
only build assets or increase assets
or capital expenditure, uh, if it is approved
by the Commerce Commission under various, the five year one,
the five year regulatory period that I spoke about before.
And then when there's individual major capital projects,
we go separately like the HDVC link, right?
So all part of
that approval is under the current regime
demonstrating the cost benefit.
And that cost benefit is today, as opposed
to the benefit necessarily in the future.
Uh, as you start to move into, uh,
we are seeing the anticipated growth, and James mentioned
before, the extended time rhymes on
before you have an I starting
to have an idea versus actually having, if it's a new line,
seven to 10 years, maybe bringing it down might put that
as a new PPI next year. Uh,
So I didn't give you a number.
I know, uh, you actually wanna get ahead
and you want to start doing that building, so you've got
to get the commun commission to approve that.
But the rules have to allow the commun commission
to anticipate that they have some freedom, um, discretion
that they can currently move, um, within,
but it's very, very limited
and probably not fit for the, um, what we have today.
So then let, let's assume you then got to this world of, uh,
the Commerce Commission saying, yes, transfer, you can,
here's, you approve a certain pocket of, um, money
to go ahead and do some anticipatory
investment for this future need.
Well, who should pay for that?
And who should pay for it today?
So again, you come back to the, our revenue, um,
is set for five years
and it's based upon a return on the assets
and that asset's gonna be sitting there.
So with,
unless you make some changes, that's just gonna flow
through the calculation, a big significant uplift in
revenue, well, who's gonna pay for that?
Then you get into the T, the TPM,
how does that get distributed?
Or do you start to thinking more creatively around, oh,
actually there's going to be a chunk of that,
it's called revenue that gets sort of re ring-fenced
and there'll be other ways in
which that might be dealt with.
So that's, that's the piece where we've got some
current rules and regulations rules,
really based upon a certain time.
We are now moving into a new time.
What, what is the solution to that problem? Mm-hmm.
Yeah. And, um, and that's that shift from a,
a very stable, um, operating environment to a,
a significant growth environment.
Um, yeah. And just ensuring that the, the rules keep up
with that, that change.
So we are not ready to put a solution in front of you
or the commission, uh, or the EA or anybody at the moment,
but we're doing work to think about how that gets unpicked
as we look into RCP five and be so 20, 30 and beyond.
Yeah. Um, because to, to my catch, you know,
just in time will be too late.
Just enough will be too little.
We need to stay ahead to be in a neighbor so
that the GFE plant that wants to connect can connect.
Yeah. And maybe just to give some,
if I think about R CCP four, that we are, the period
that we are in now where we've had, um, we've signaled the,
the projects, we've identified the projects that we need
to do, and that's all about, um, making the current grid
as resilient as possible, as efficient as possible
for the growth that is, that is coming.
So there's not a, a lot of anticipatory, um, work in there.
It's about resiliency, mobility, strengthening. Yeah.
Anybody else on Tony's question?
Because I, I will sub one on that then, which is just
how do you get the, the distinction between paying
for the resilience and the operation of the system
as it is now for the current use that it is
and the system for growth, whether that is more people,
whether that is electrification of, you know, um,
things which are currently driven
by some thermal power, whatever it might be.
How do you, how do you deal with
that particular proposition?
This goes to your, who pays? Yeah.
So when I'm planning, um, the current planning framework,
uh, we plan ahead for formally 15 years, um, for the grid.
And then we take the first five years of that effectively
and put that into the five yearly process.
And that gets funded. There is, that is maintenance.
Um, there is some allowance for, there is allowance
for growth that we can demonstrate.
And with a five year window, you can say, Hey,
that's gonna happen and that's gonna happen.
Uh, and then there's the ability to request more money over
the top, uh, for major capital projects, anything
above $30 million, um, uh,
that isn't in the base expenditure,
but we can make a case for it. Um, so,
So my question goes to who pays
That, that, so that goes into
and is allocated under the current TPM as I discussed, um,
earlier under the benefits based methodology. Yeah.
So if it's growth, who pays for it?
If It's existing consumers
or new consumers, effectively?
Oh, I say there is some distinction there.
Um, if, uh, if it's, if it's customer driven, uh,
uh, growth, um, we, we might have an, uh,
a commercial arrangement with the relevant, uh, customer
to build the asset, uh, for them, uh,
and connect it into the, into the grid that's
outside the regulated mm-hmm.
Approach under a, a transmission works agreement.
Um, uh, but
otherwise the, the grid gets, um, allocated under the TPM,
all of it, including, uh, uh, some growth investment.
If we move to an anticipatory process, we'd have
to think differently about that.
And we are, and we,
and we're very cognizant of the fact that, um,
any anticipatory investment needs to be able to demonstrate
that this, um, very low risk of regret, um,
and the electricity system is changing.
There's more distributed sources coming on.
Uh, so, you know, we need to be going at it, um,
transparently, uh, with our analysis and assessment
and sharing that with the all stakeholders, um,
and having the conversation about whether it's the
right thing for the country or not.
Yeah. But it's, it's, the question was the more
anticipatory, presumably the more the growth somehow gets,
has to be captured by something that's not an
Existing consumer. Yeah,
That's right. And we have to
think about
what is a method where, what could that,
Okay, so you're still working on that methodology. Yes.
We watched that. A great deal of interest, Scott.
So we've got a supplementary
and then a couple, a couple more questions go.
Yeah. Okay. Um, so, uh, on that, as an as,
as an asset owner, have you given any thought
to treasuries asset sale review, um,
given your example of the public good
or the, the sharing of transformer
with Meridian helping out, you know, it's a public good bit
of work that you've done, but should there be asset sales
that Treasury, treasury are looking at?
We could argue that that's a different way of,
of managing things, a more market-based private gain
way of doing things.
And, and this is sort
of feeds into your anticipatory planning,
um, creating stability.
Where do you, where do you think,
have you given any thought to this?
So, um, it's the shareholder of any organization
that decides whether to hold, sell, or buy.
So it's not for trans power to have a view on that.
I think our, what we are focused,
That's more on the planning space. Are you,
Well, regardless of who owns us, we need a national grid.
We need the national grid to be safe, reliable, um,
and provide value for Kiwis.
So that's pr, that's, that's our focus,
and that's what we endeavor to do.
And if there are decisions that are made by others around
who owns us or et cetera, et cetera, those different models,
uh, we will participate in those conversations at the
right, at the right time.
But in the meantime, I want my management team focused
on, on the business
and delivering, uh, under our statement of intent
and achieving all of the measures that we've set out.
Okay. And, um, another question
in RCP four, we've heard that there are some conditions, um,
related to the release of resource, uh,
in achieving KPIs.
And, and we also know that there's, you talked about the,
the aging workforce.
So particularly, I'm particularly concerned about, you know,
where do you, where do you see that new, that growth
and workforce coming from?
Are you, is it, is it a question of poaching from,
from the sector because we've heard that happens?
Or is there a pipeline of vocational training that you,
you're seeing or you need?
Yeah. Or where are we, where are we based? Yeah,
It would be, I'll, I'll start the new jump in.
So, um, this was identified as, uh, the risk
of not having the right workforce was identified as a,
a risk as we moved into RCP four.
And we were very clear on that in terms of the, um,
increase in the workforce, not just head count,
but of the right skills in order to be able
to deliver the work that was needed.
And that's why the, I think the Communist Commission
probably rightly thought,
I wonder if you can actually grow this workforce
to the extent that you are anticipating will need transfer.
So they put some, if you will, riders on the funding so
that we would only get the, the,
the revenue if we'd actually meet the targets.
So we've, we've had a, um, a program in place led by, uh,
our, um, uh, head of, uh, human capital to actually drive
that increase in workforce.
And we've been very successful at achieving that.
But it's not only from us,
because our service providers that Jamie's mentioned
before, we need them to lift their workforce.
And then also we are very conscious of the fact that
the generators and others that,
so everybody needs to lift their workforce.
So the good thing about that is, uh, energy is a,
an area globally where there will be an, an increase in, um,
it's an opportunity for, for new jobs
and new skills and things.
So we are working collectively as an industry in order
to build that still early days,
but I think the, the will is definitely there.
And then the other part of it, of course, is
how do we leverage, uh, from data and AI
and so forth in order to, um,
get more, uh, outcomes
and outputs from our investments and our resources.
So what else would you add?
I think that's a great answer.
Um, so that's Islam workforce?
No, it's workforce. Dan, Dan, Dan's gonna stop off that one.
Thanks. You mentioned AI come back to you curious to, um,
get a sense of what trans power's investment in AI
tools looks like.
Yeah. And, um, there's a lot of debate around the,
you know, um, returns on investment.
Yes. Um, is there any early indications of likelihood,
you know, returns in terms of uplifts
and productivity, uplifts and efficiency?
Um, you know, your comments on Yeah,
I'll make comments and public comments and then hands.
So, um, I'm on a number of, um, I have the advantage
of sitting on three commercial boards.
Um, so this has very much become, as you are aware,
very much a focus for the director community in terms
of investment versus return.
So, um, I've got a particular laser, laser focus on it.
Uh, this area I'm using AI more broadly,
or using data to make good evidence-based decisions is not a
new concept transpire.
So if you go back, um, uh, going back quite some number
of years ago, started to use more, um, machine learning
and rich data to make decisions
around exactly when certain assets needed to be, um,
repaired or maintained, as opposed to saying, you know,
there's a standard life for every, um, widget
and regardless of whether it needs to be repaired
or what have you, we're just gonna deal with all
of those widgets on the, on the same basis, as opposed
to thinking, well, actually, if
that is located in the south island or next to the ocean,
or whatever, the, the need is different.
So it's not a new concept around within, uh, transfer
of using evidence-based decision making.
Um, and that is the, I would say, the joy
of working in an organization which has a lot of engineers
and people who are very technical
and thoughtful and evidence-based.
That's actually in our team's DNA, to be thinking about
these new tools from a, well,
what's the actual outcome and feedback?
What am I hoping to achieve?
And building that in the front end, um, of the work.
Also being very mindful that we can't introduce any, uh,
unintended risks into security of supply
or health and safety as well.
So what would you add to that?
Yeah, I thought, um, I agree, uh, agree with all of
that can, and, and the, we capture more data now as we look
to more
and more condition based monitoring,
condition based asset management, making better
and more accurate decisions, uh, on the timing of, um,
of investing in replacement for repairs.
Um, we're also looking, uh, at, um,
and this is, this is AI enabled,
but it's not ai,
pure automation is a, is a big part of the future.
We're looking at digital switch management for switching
around the substations, uh, around the country.
We've got 174 substations.
A lot of switching goes on to manage outages.
I, you might not, we, you won't notice it,
but we do 8,000 planned outages every year, uh,
and that's gonna jump to something like 11
or 12,000 over the coming five years.
So, um, switching to ensure that circuits, uh,
remain in place in delivery energy is, is really important.
And we are looking at how we can digitize that.
We we're running some trials, uh, what are we now?
So it'll be next year, running trials next year, um,
uh, on that, for example.
And, uh, and, and that will reduce, um,
pressure on on workforce Mm.
Uh, in that area.
Um, we do, um, we do have, uh,
our own AI bot internally, um,
that we're all toing around with.
Um, and,
and it's, um, in its early days, I'm not sure
how much productivity it added as the chief executive, uh,
sent transmission towers that look like Kiwis.
Um, but, but we are actually seeing people use it, uh,
and more seriously, people are using it
to summarize documents, just little short tasks, you know?
Um, and, and we do see it as a big part of the future.
We're doing it in a safe way
because we still, um,
we still want humans signing off on mission critical
designs, equipment, processes, uh, for the country.
So, um, you know, we're, we're advancing, um, uh,
carefully, but with intent.
Great. So, awesome.
Thank you. Still on, on This, this
Issue. Yeah. While you,
two, two quick stops on that.
Um, what are the, what, what's the biggest skill bottleneck
that you see within your context?
And then going back to the ai, I agree with you, I think
of all the environments, yours is probably one of the best,
not just to, um, utilize yourself,
but to be a, a little bit of an incubator, um, for,
you know, the other parts of New Zealand society in terms
of upskilling that.
Do you have any, um, apart from getting
to grips with it yourself?
Yeah. Is there any thoughts about that in terms of what?
Workforce development?
Oh, the, there's a lot of, um, a lot of work going on, uh,
between, uh,
and in fact, our AI adoption is actually,
whilst it's supported, enabled by our IST function, it's led
by HR
because it's, it's, there's a bit of,
it's a cultural change element, uh,
to actually get the uptake.
So, um, so we are seeing ourselves, um,
and particularly our younger staff who just had a,
a new group of summer interns start, um,
and they are AI ready. Yeah,
Yeah, yeah. And
a great envi, a great environment
To be and quickly transition
to being AI leaders in the organization.
Uh, they're the ones who, you know,
crack this going forward for us.
Um, I agree with you. We are, we are a data rich, uh,
evidence-based system from end to end, uh,
and optimizing the whole system end to end is where AI
and our data and, and then enabled by AI can take us.
Um, so that's very much a focus.
And are there any specific bottlenecks?
Like is it, is it, oh, sorry, engineering or,
Yeah, look, the, the areas where we do see, um,
and these are global, uh, protection engineers
and power system engineers.
Trans power has a, um, uh,
and this is been a surprise to me.
Um, I've been in the electricity industry a long, long time,
um, and know lots of people at,
at transplant have done for a long time.
But on starting, um, at Transparent,
I've been surprised at the depth of capability.
And in talking with, um, uh, two of my, um, direct reports
who, who've come out the Australian system
and one spent some time in the Canadian system,
we actually have globally significant depth,
um, in some areas.
So whilst I say we, I would love to get more protection, uh,
system engineers and, um, and sorry, power system engineers
and protection engineers.
Mm-hmm. Um, uh, we are punching above our weight,
um, uh, on a, on a global level, we are working increasingly
with our external consultants who do design work for us
to access their international capability.
Mm-hmm. Um, and reach into their international offices, uh,
to ensure we can keep up, um, with,
with customer requirement and our, um, recruitment function
and the HR team, yes, we're bringing through grad,
we work closely with the universities to sort of say, Hey,
these, this is, these are our needs.
New Zealand needs these capabilities, can you develop those?
We also, yeah, we recruit globally, um,
to get the resources we need. Okay.
Really quick start before my question. No, go.
Come on, go on. Okay. So, so ai, um, we all understand
that AI is having an incredible,
incredible demand on energy systems.
Are you managing the emissions of your increased use of ai?
I,
Uh, our emissions targets remain, uh, on track.
Um, and New Zealand's electricity system is so green that,
um, if you're gonna put AI anywhere, it should be here,
international advantage, bring it on. Mm.
Okay. Um, so the question I want
to come back to your, um, point about social license
and the build, the need for build, I personally,
I think wind turbines are beautiful things should have them
everywhere, but, um, logistic,
but in relation to hydro, for example,
that's a little bit more contentious
and, uh, no, that, um, Meridian,
we're looking at accessing contingent storage, five meters,
trans powers, not in favor.
Would you, and if we think about social license,
could you explain that and we, and, and,
and what other hydro options you are,
you are thinking of? Yeah,
We, our, our, um, view on, on contingent storage is,
is least a social license issue that we acknowledge,
you know, ultimately it's
consenting authorities that set those.
And, and social license issues are very rich,
um, in, in that environment.
For us, it's about, um, the nation's fuel reserve.
Um, and that contingent hydro storage is the, um, reliable
and secure energy of last resort, uh,
or electricity fuel of last resort for the country.
So, um, we like to see it, uh, there
and available for when things get really tight
and not, um, utilized in advance of that.
Um, and there's a very detailed, um, uh, set
of rules and processes that we go through, uh,
that the industry's well aware of
and been, we've been consulting on for improvements, um, uh,
in the last couple months, um, to ensure
that industry's very clear on when it,
when it will be enabled and, and when not.
Um, we have had really good input in
that consultation work from people like Meridian
and others saying actually the way these operating limits
work can, um, can actually make it operationally challenging
to utilize that fuel even when, when the nation needs it.
So we've made some adjustments.
It's been a really useful process,
but fundamentally that is the fuel of last resort
for the system and all else fails, um, when the,
the coal stock piles used.
Um, that's what we've got left at. It's very precious.
Um, uh, we've done some work, um, with some external, uh,
agent, well external consultant, um, that,
that talks about the value of that to New Zealand bank.
Yes, there's a bit of cost in holding that insurance,
but the value of it is, is a multiple of, of
that over time.
To go back to my earlier comments, uh, that will change
because the level
of other renewables in the system will mean the water will
be stored just naturally, um, uh, on its own.
So there is a point we can see a future
where the contingent storage regime, uh, currently exists,
doesn't need to exist
because the lakes will be naturally operating,
uh, at a higher level.
Um, uh, but that's some time in the future.
It's many, many, uh, terawatt hours
of renewable investment away.
Uh, so, so I stop on that. Um, and I like your optimism.
That's great. So should we be in a,
in a situation in a few years
where there's some pump storage, for example, Onslow
or some smaller pump storage, north
and south island, what other hydro do you see?
You are, you are aware of what's,
what's being proposed to me?
We might see a two meter lift at Buki, perhaps,
or, you know, and that's,
that's we're talking social license, um, big time.
Um, where do you, where do you see the easy wins?
Um, look, I think, to be honest,
and this is a little bit of personal experience in this
developing generation projects, um, there are no easy wins
with, um, developing large scale
infrastructure in New Zealand.
That's hard work. Um, uh, the, um,
but we are as transparent, are hugely supportive of,
of any investment that adds, uh, security to the system so
that Kiwis can be assured that,
that they can develop their businesses, grow new industries,
and grow our economy and the, in the energy be there.
So we are supportive of, um, of the, uh,
developers looking at, at different, um, options.
So just and very quick step on that.
So you very concerned about the security of the system.
Coming back to my first question about the
affordability of the system.
What is the, the most affordable forms of generation
that we can possibly have in our, in our system
for the 21st century?
Uh, and I think, um, the market is, is is showing us that,
um, right now you're seeing solar coming forward,
you're seeing wind coming forward as the cost of those, um,
uh, foray rows briefly as the world,
uh, supply chain tighten.
But then that supply chain seems to have, uh, uh,
been built out and we're
seeing some of those costs stabilize.
I understand. Um, uh, which is encouraging.
So yeah, wind, solar in New Zealand, geothermal
'cause of its base load capacity, all firmed
by the lowest cost form storage, which will, which will, um,
shift in any given moment between the economics of a battery
for short term capacity versus the economics
of a diesel fired, um, uh, a plant
or a gas fired plant.
'cause they've got fuel inputs,
those economics will move through
Time. And what about hydro
And hydro of course.
And that, that's where we see the lakes, the current lakes,
and any future lakes playing a different
role, um, through time.
They, they can play both, uh, depending on the size
of the late deep, um, storage or, um, uh, and
or peaking, um, on a daily basis as well.
So we do have a, uh, uh, have an assumption that, that
that role of hydro lakes will shift through time,
but it requires a lot of other build for the hydro lakes
to move out of their current role,
which is providing about 55%
of our electricity field at the moment.
Mm-hmm. And then the other consequence that, sorry,
which just does go to social license, as the lakes, um,
role changes and they are held higher,
and I've received complaints about this
as a generator in the past, there will be more spill.
There is no avoiding that.
There'll be moments where you've got the lakes held quite
high, um, and you're utilizing the wind and the geothermal
and solar and, uh, the backup of gas
or diesel, whatever else is needed from time to time.
Um, and, uh, and there might be a big inflow of rain, um,
or a big snow melt or something,
and you'll, you'll spill more water.
So the same issue, still the same, same issue.
So just just on that, um, so if we're thinking about
an overbuild of renewables in, in a, in a, in a future
where we are fully electrified, um,
how valuable would pump storage be to soak up at excess wind
and solar to, to enable us to move to a system that,
that keeps, keeps the electricity portable,
but decarbonize at the same time?
I think, um, any form of storage with rapid release
of energy is gonna be valuable as the system, uh,
gets more renewable.
You know, the predictions are, will be 97
or 98% renewable by 2030.
Um, getting beyond that gets really quite tricky.
Um, uh, on the, on the overbuild.
I mean, it's an interesting comment.
I i, the o
overbuild, I don't think, um, happens in an extreme case.
I think it's just building marginally ahead.
'cause investors are always gonna need a return on their
investment, otherwise the build won't happen.
It, it's just a slight adjustment so
that the investment's coming, um, just ahead of time.
Um, so there's still a long term return for investors.
Um, uh, and,
and it keeps a lid on, on prices, uh, to customers, keeps,
ensures it's affordable, takes security risk out
of the forward, uh, curve as well, um, for customers.
So it's a, I know that's, you know,
it's just a marginal difference.
Um, it's not a massive, I
I don't foresee a massive overbuild of, of, of energy.
Anything like that would only be temporal.
So before I go to Simon, just to follow up on from that,
so the cheapest form of energy at the moment to, to build
solar, wind, you said geothermal as well,
but the solar and the wind need the backup.
So how do we, how are we pricing in so we the backup
because that's necessary to support those ones.
That's, but I'm struggling with
All bit. Okay. So that the,
the some rounds numbers mm-hmm.
Uh, to have in your, in your,
here we talk about the firmed cost of electricity.
So, um, or, or, or the, um, LCOE
or LRMC of, uh, of, of electric, the firmed costs.
So, uh,
and predictions are
that they're currently looking forward, right?
Right now the firmed cost of electricity, whether it's solar
or wind, whatever, supported by a form that confirm it, uh,
is averaging out to the market at a roundabout $160 a
megawatt hour and a couple of years.
Predictions are, I was looking at a, a report from, um, BCG,
uh, yesterday
and, uh, they had $106 a megawatt hour now,
which is about right, $140 megawatt hour by about 2028.
And by 2030 down back to
what is a very internationally competitive a hundred
to $120 a megawatt hour, um, firmed cost,
uh, it's the mix, it's the overall mix that matters.
It's, um, you know, it's certain suppliers, um, uh,
certain retailers, certain businesses will say, we only buy,
we only use renewable electricity.
We're all using the same mix, uh, outta the wires. Yeah.
Uh, yeah, we know. And it's the cost of that mix that we,
that we need to engage with as opposed to saying, oh,
we should just do solar 'cause it's cheap.
Well, if you just do solar, the lights will go
out and the sun goes down.
So, um, it's the mix that matters
and questions around what's the lowest cost form of firming,
um, are questions that the market
and the industry continue to, um, engage with.
And the economics of those things will change through time
as global markets shift and technology advances.
So, um, we are, we are a really, we are in a, uh, look,
we're in a tight spot now 'cause of the loss of gas.
Um, but the industry is responding.
Um, and coal, the coal stockpile is a big move
for dry air risk.
There are projects, uh, like batteries
and things coming forward, channel infrastructures talking
about, um, uh, uh, 80 megawatt diesel plant at Marton.
That would be fantastic. Um,
'cause the, the grids there,
there's very little investment from us needed.
And I think all that, um, diesel storage is there as well.
So from an infrastructure perspective, it looks reasonably,
um, uh, easy to do and ready to go.
Um, so all of these, it, it's the blend of things
that matter and the, the numbers to have in your head is,
it's currently high because we've seen the, the,
the gas price rise, gas availability fall
and price rise, simple demand supply dynamic.
Um, as new, um, generation comes into the market,
the expectation is that price, um, uh,
wholesale price falls back
and the incentive, the firm price of 120,
The incentive is still there to invest at
that declining price.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. That's cool. Um, Simon,
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Um, the Frontier Report identified that the cost
of the emissions trading scheme add somewhere
around $60 a megawatt hour
to price electricity when Huntley's operating.
And of course it always operates
because it must, um, do you think there's a case
for allocating that insurance cost across,
uh, all participants in the sector, uh,
rather than having it land on one player
and then everyone else is like, well, well, the start
of the floor price is now 60 bucks a megawatt hour.
Do you think there's a, a case for maybe thinking
as a system operator about how that cost is allocated?
Uh, look, the, um, there's obviously a blend of,
of plant at the Huntley site.
It's a, it's a, you know, nationally critical site
and it has different costs of it.
'cause some's gas, some Sure.
Uh, diesel some's coal, and they're building a battery.
So, and they're looking at biomass pallets as well,
torrified, uh, pallets.
So, um, their cost structural shift through time, uh, as to
where the carbon price goes, it turns up in
that blended mix of wholesale price.
Um, uh, so, um, it does get passed through, uh,
and we'll leave carbon policy to the, uh,
carbon policy experts.
I think you
Want to, okay. No, I don't.
I'm gonna get back to Thanks, Scott.
Oh, you, You're working your way through.
Thank you. Yeah. Yeah. I might,
I might do a couple Long Well, it keeps on growing
because you, you open up, you give us great answers.
Um, thinking about, thinking about the future energy system,
there, there are, there are things that are
underway like the TA link proposal.
So, you know, how has that progressed much further?
And, and, um,
and I know you've been talking to Copenhagen Partners
for the offshore, offshore renewables, should
that bill actually proceed before Christmas
or sometime 2026?
Um, those are, those are relatively large,
large and influential additions to our energy system.
So what, what, what sort of changes?
What, what, what's that can do to our,
to the way we run things? Either or both
The, um, so we are engaged with all potential customers.
Um, and if
or when, uh, those projects get, um, progressed,
we'll work with them on, on solutions to ensure
that they can connect to the system.
We run an open system, so anyone, uh, can connect.
Um, and the market will dictate,
or the, you know, the, the cost space will dictate
how competitive or not they are.
Uh, and, and to navigate their way through that a large,
um, you, so the second part of your question was
what would a large input like that do to the system?
Um, again, the system's dynamic.
So you would, you would commission a very large power
station like that over a, you know, particularly it's wind.
You do it in chunks,
but would come into the system, uh, uh,
would likely be offered in, at, um, at a low price.
Uh, and, um,
and so other plant would be displaced by it
until such time as demand turned.
And if the other plant, um, the risk, the risk
that we see in this period is the, the other plant
that gets displaced is dispatchable like
thermal plant at the moment.
Um, uh, then you, you start
to get challenged on your ability to meet peaks
with dispatchable, electricity, fuel, um, or dry years.
So, um,
and again, this independent, we're gonna release this, um,
this independent report, um, shortly that talks about that.
It says as you get more and more renewables
and if you get a big input like that
and it results in, in athe plant saying, well, we're not,
we can't make a return now.
Um, so they switch off, you start to lose your,
you potentially lose your backup plan Yeah.
Um, through the system.
So we're very con conscious of that
and talking with industry about that.
And indeed, um, with, um, officials,
I mean, the good thing about it is if there's an,
if there's a investors who are wanting
to invest significant amounts of money on large projects,
they know that one of the things they have to clear away is
how are they gonna get the electricity from
where it's generated to actually onto the grid?
Because otherwise it's all very good,
well generating this out,
but if you can't actually just sell it to anybody,
it's probably not a great plan.
Mm-hmm. So they do tend to, um, come
and see us quite early on
and our team's always very focused around them,
understanding the cost of that connection
and how does that work in,
and where that would fit in with the queue.
'cause we make sure everything's fully costed
and then of course it would, if it was to proceed,
have an impact on our work as well, and
therefore, and the overall system.
So, um, we do tend to get, they don't tend to be surprises.
It's, you don't wake up tomorrow morning
and find that there's been a new, um, uh,
wind farm developed overnight.
Yeah. So, so you do have a good lead time into it. Yeah.
Yeah. You're going onto
Another theme, mate, just to, just to finish off
that one really quickly, you finish
that one 'cause I wanna stop off that one.
So, so, um, do, do you think that, um,
transparent statu statutory objective is enabling you to,
to do what you have to do to
anticipate the future energy system
that under all government policy will be fully renewable?
Not our electricity system, but our energy system
because we are decarbonizing despite, you know,
the little disruptions we have from time to time there's is
do you think that your statutory objective is, is
enabling enough or, or would you or,
or, or is there something else?
So I would say overall, yes.
I don't feel that we are constrained in terms of the walk,
the work that we need to do, um,
and that we must do for the benefit of Kiwis.
So that's the short answer.
But there's always a, but you know, we have identified,
and I think we've spoken to that today, a number
of different areas where the rules, the regulation,
et cetera, need to start to be flexed for the new world
that we live in and what to have.
So that's a short answer to the question.
I wanna pick up where I thought you were going
and the comment you made that, um, James, about the, um,
the thermal capacity.
So you've put on a whole lot of intimate capacity,
price goes down to certain point thermal capacity.
No, we're outta here. We, we, we can't make this thing work.
Um, which goes to the point
that Simon was raising around insurers.
How do we put in, and then you also talk about spilling,
um, uh, lakes.
So let's say we've got, at the moment, most
of our generation is still the four big gen tailers.
Um, I can't what proportion, but it's a high proportion.
Yeah. As we get more who more companies
who are not those big four, how do we actually make sure
that we've got, so if I'm,
if I'm Meridian and I'm going, well, hang on.
I don't wanna spill my, the water outta my lake.
I want to use that water, which means, sorry mate.
You, you who, um, got,
you've just invested in your new wind farm.
We, we've actually got surplus energy at the moment,
so it's gonna drive the price down.
Somebody's gonna end up wearing that.
But so how do we, my question really is
how do we make sure we've actually fund, uh, supported
that firming capacity in good times and in bad times?
Because the bad times when you need it, the good times when,
if it's not being used, who's paying for it to be there?
And does that just land on particular generators?
I know the four big Gentiles that come to come
to the party on, with Genesis on Huntley.
Yes. But you then need actually everybody who's in the
generation system and party to that.
They send nods there as well, because
otherwise, ultimately they might go, well actually
we can't make this thing work.
We are out. And when you get that dry winter with
that peak capacity, then there's nobody there.
So this, um, look, the, the Huntley firming options,
the deal between the generators to support Huntley
for the next, um, 10 years is great in terms of enabling,
um, that, and that's an example
of effectively long term contracting that supports the, um,
I guess the fixed cost of the plant so it can exist
and be maintained and have staff and fuel sitting there
and all the things that you need to have an operation
that only works periodically.
And when they call on it and it works,
they then pay another cost through to, um,
to Genesis for the operation of it.
Um, so there's a, that's a contractual means of ensuring
that, uh, effectively a reserve plant
is funded in the market.
We run a, um, energy only market in, in New Zealand, um,
not a, there's no capacity market.
And so energy prices, uh, to fund reserve plan
that isn't otherwise underwritten for the long term, um,
by either a direct customer or other retailers.
It's, we talk about the Gen Taylors underwriting,
effectively it's their retail arms who are, uh, underwriting
that so that they can serve their
customers with firm energy. So,
Which goes again to, there's a bunch
of other small retailers who are not part of that.
Yeah. And there is capacity available.
Uh, I I see from genesis's, um, results last week, uh,
and sorry, investor day, uh, last week.
There's still capacity available for other retailers
who are looking, um, to ensure
that they can access firm supply.
Um, so there's still more product available from
Genesis, which is terrific.
Um, look, so we're an energy only market.
You can do it by contract
to ensure the capacity is retained and funded.
Um, uh, or, uh, that plant
or the owner of that plant could, um,
run a merchant purely merchant operation.
Um, which is quite high risk.
'cause the plant won't run much as, as more
and more renewables come in, that that sort
of backup plant will run less unless, unless, unless,
unless it's capacity factor might fall from 10% down to 2%.
And so it will need, in order to still recover its costs in
that 2% of the time that it runs in the future, uh,
if it hasn't got a capacity, uh,
contracted capacity payment funding, it will need the price
to go very, very high, very high, um, uh,
thousands and thousands of dollars to be able
to be funded to remain there.
And that's what the energy market is designed to do.
Uh, that, um, in the moments where you're in that, um, uh,
calling on a, a reserve plant like that, um,
you, uh, prices are, prices will go to the point where that,
um, plant will make its, uh, will be able to, um,
meet its return and, um, and as it operates less and less
and less, that price has to go higher and higher
and higher in order to cover its fixed costs.
Now if someone contracts with it,
and most of the owners of these, um, this sort
of plant will, uh, will be seeking to sell contracts
so they've got certainty of return rather than waiting
for these, um, volatile points that market will evolve.
So two parts of the question then, how does that affect a,
another, um, generator who is purely an intermittent?
So let's say, well, the offshore wind farm turns up,
says he's a, he's a gigawatt
of power when the wind's blowing, it's not quite
as good when it's not, I know it's pretty reliable
that one relatively,
but how does the, how does, if they have no backup,
how does that work for the point of point of view
of them contracting to supply energy to somebody?
So they want us, they, they're gonna supply
to all these customers
and their energy's not available at sometimes
it depends and they've got no backup. How does that
Work? So it depends who they're
selling to
and the nature of that arrangement.
Um, I mean, they can sell all of it into the,
everyone sell can go into the wholesale market.
Yeah. Um, and it physically always
goes into the wholesale market.
Um, but financially they, they are likely to have, um,
sold that energy in advance, however, you know,
however long they can get from a customer, um, to
that customer and have a fixed payment.
And if they don't have that energy, in other words,
the wind's not blowing, they've gotta then
go buy that from somebody else.
Yeah. They'll buy it from the market.
Right. Okay, cool. So,
And or commit to a hunt firming
option or the likes too. Yep.
Okay. And so the, the,
the 2% you were talking about raised this, it's the hunt,
the example, but increasingly if we're moving to dams, the,
the, the, the lake system, the hydro system,
which is actually in the backbone of the,
the actual day-to-day generation, if that becomes more
of a battery, what's the incentive on what's the incentive
on the owners of that battery, you know, the meridian,
mercury, et cetera, contacts to actually keep it that in
that battery as opposed to saying, well,
actually we'd rather sell our energy
because we've got, nobody's paying for us
otherwise, what, what's, what's to,
why would they say we're gonna just hold
that just in case somebody wants it, as opposed to saying,
well actually we are going to sell that energy
because we need some revenue as well, rather than allowing
that intermittent newcomers to be able to grab that energy.
It's that, that that price say,
Yeah. At, at the moment,
much of that energy is being sold, um,
electricity is being sold into very low prices.
Yep. Yeah. The bulk of it is going
to very low prices when it's,
and the high dose are very, fulfill prices are low.
I'll, uh, I'll have a nosy, um, at current prices for you.
Um, the, um, over time, uh,
we think that, uh, that
as hydro moves into a more peaking roller
or caption more peaking prices, so it's, uh,
not suggesting the hydro, um, uh, system is devalued, um,
it, it possibly is more valuable
because it's fulfilling this role.
People will contract with it for cover,
for their own risk cover, and it,
and the hydro system will sell into high price points,
it providing that capacity.
So that's the, the dynamic shift in
that this is a long term move.
This is not a sudden thing.
No, no. Many, many, many years.
It's quite a different market than what we've had.
That's why I asked that question about what it was like,
you know, going back essentially pre a
lot of wind Yeah. And
Solar. Mm. I think the
market itself, the market, um,
I know subject to a change from, uh, uh, uh, from regulators
and, and policy makers,
the market itself stays the same at prices.
It'll price, um, what is the lowest cost form of support in
that given moment, 24 7.
Um, and it's up to the owner of that support plant
to offer it in at a price that they think, um,
will be accepted.
Uh, and won't price accidentally
price themselves outta the market.
Someone will come in under them. Yeah.
So, so, so they could, they could generate through hydro.
Mm-hmm. That's what we wanna do.
Or they could say, well, we can hold it back
because we think somebody else might want higher price
Later. Yeah. And they run complex
models for that. Right.
Cool. Um, Tracy had a quick question then,
Simon, I think that will get us to time.
Um, I'm just being self-indulgent now.
I'm perseverating about the TPM
and thinking about, um, if there's international examples.
It's not that Tpm.
No. Uh, um, thinking about,
there's international examples.
You've obviously signaled
that you're having a review last month.
Um, is that guided by any international examples?
Has anybody already created tools that we can benefit from?
Or are we in a kind of more unique position?
Um, I'm loath. So we do
look at international examples. Um,
I just realized as I said, you'll be loath to
Yeah. And I'm loath to
say that we are, um, u unique
electricity is electricity, um, all around the world,
but every, every country's got slightly different contexts.
Mm. Um, both geographically,
but you know, um, continental was quite different to island.
Um, uh, and so our, we are an island system.
We have to solve for ourselves
and we have to fund, uh, fund ourselves.
Um, and we're a surprisingly largely land mass, so go back
to that comment, right?
So the cost of, of sending electrons around the country, uh,
but the tools to remote areas,
The tools exist for you to work up a different methodology
that takes into account the change of environment of
what becomes a much more exciting dynamic.
Yes. Yeah. Yeah.
My only caution to that will be it's the electricity
authority who has the,
The same On it.
So we can come up with ideas
and of course, wouldn't it be nice
to say we could lift and shift?
Yeah. But it's not that simple.
But that doesn't say that there are some good examples
that we can pick up from certain aspects of
how things have worked in other countries
and put them forward and then think about,
well, how would that work here?
Yeah. So there's no bad idea.
And we, um, you know, we're, we, um,
because of the unique nature of our system, um,
we actually get accepted into some
of the large system international forums.
Mm-hmm. Uh, so a member of searay, which is the,
that's the council of large electricity systems,
not large electricity system, but we're in there
and we get to learn from them and we get to support them.
We are the leaders in space weather, as Michelle mentioned.
So we, you know, we're supporting the UK thinking about
how it manages that risk.
And we're, um, a member of the Association
of Power Exchanges, which is again, very large nations.
But 'cause we are such a unique system
so far ahead in our ability to self-manage, um, uh, and,
and be, uh, uh, secure, affordable, and uh,
and sustainable, um, we get it in the door.
So we get to leverage those.
You, you do see people at transport, travel overseas.
Mm-hmm. Um, that is, and that will continue.
Um, and I want that so
that I can see we are learning from the best in the world,
um, and bringing that home to New Zealand
so we can deliver the best we possibly
can for Kiwi. Is there
Reciprocity there? In so
far as, um, we're also a good place to trial things,
Uh, bigger markets, markets that
with within reason without putting our grid at risk?
Uh, yeah. We are more than happy to support, uh, trials.
Yes. In fact, um, you know, uh, some of the EDBs,
uh, and us have been working with, um, Google on some
of their, um, Google X products.
Not quite interested, um, for grid management.
Last question, Carlos? No, it's fine. No, Simon. Simon?
No. Okay. I I'll just ask one more then.
And that is, um, you,
you're predicting about an 80% increase in, um, generation
by 2050.
Um, you say that there's about,
I think there's 1600 odd megawatts, 16,000 odd megawatts,
uh, and at some stage in the process,
either under construction
or being thought about, so that which would be one
and a half times our existing, our existing network.
Now that means that if all the ideas that are there come
to fruition, that's way more than, that's that 80%.
So you are reasonably confident that we'll be able
to deliver that 80% uplift, um,
through the ideas that are around.
And no doubt more ideas will
Come. Yeah. The, the
answers, it'll,
it'll need more than it's currently in the pipeline.
Um, uh,
but the re resort, the natural resources exist as long
as we're willing to make the trade offs and develop them.
Yeah. Scott,
you've got about 10 seconds to ask the question.
Okay. Um, so you mentioned regional, regional planning,
and it sounds a little lot like local area energy planning.
I'm very aware of, uh, electrify queenstown.
Um, just thinking about the regions
that are really leading on this, where are you sitting
with advice on vehicle to grid virtual power plants?
The, the, the sort of whole system electrification Yeah.
That they can participate
In. Yeah. Um, and,
And I guess transmission alternatives.
Uh, it's a, um, trying to think of a short answer.
We're engaged heavily in all of those conversations,
particularly down in, um, in Queenstown.
Um, working with closely with Aurora
and Power Net, the local authorities,
the electrified Queenstown crew, um, working out
what is the best option for a resilient and secure
and affordable, um, system.
Queenstown iss an interesting example
because you, you actually do have to build for the peak,
otherwise they can't serve their tour numbers.
Mm-hmm. Uh, it's also exceptionally dark in Queenstown in
the middle of the day quite often.
Um, so it's a, it's a tricky mix, um,
to get right at.
At the moment. We've, we've just invested in the frankton,
um, sub to increase the, the transformers there.
And we've been out talking with customers
with Power Net in Aurora.
Um, uh,
and the feedback is that a, uh, strengthening
of the line from, uh, Cromwell through to Franklin is sort
of the preferred option from the community.
And now it's Aurora and Power Net looking at exactly how to,
how to go about achieving that.
We'll work with them on that.
And that will be in addition to
what we still think will be a significant increase in
battery and solar, um, distributed around. Michelle.
James, thank you so much.
I think there's probably a few more
questions still, uh, outstanding.
But That's okay. We, we really appreciate the time
to you and your team there.
Uh, thank you for the work you do. Um, you keep the help,
Keep the lights on as Part of that, that big team.
Thank you very much. Thanks. Thanks team.